Jordan - Dr. Warren Farrell is the author of books published in seventeen languages.
 Including two award-winning international best sellers:
 Why Men Are Like That and The Myth of Male Power
 Warren has been chosen by the Financial Times as one of the leading thinkers of the top hundred.
 He is currently Chairman of the Commission to Create a White House Council on Boys and Men.
 He is the only man in America who has been elected three times.
 for the Board of the National Organization for Women, ONM, in New York City.
 Dr. Farrel has been featured repeatedly on Oprah, Today, and Good Morning America
 and has been featured in 20/20, Forbes, The Wall Street Journal, People, Parade, and The New York Times.
 The co-author of his new book is Dr. John Gray,
 the author of Men Come from Mars, Women Come from Venus.
 Again, this is the book.
 We are going to talk, not only about the book today, the new one, The Boys' Crisis,
 but also the career of Dr. Farrell and his goals and all that,
 so I would love to introduce you to Dr. Warren Farrel
 and ask you to tell us what your intentions are and why.
 Warren - I suppose that my intentions are to see the evolution of perhaps all that time since 1969.
 When the feminist movement emerged I was very interested in it
 and I felt that women really needed to be able to be equally respected
 and enter the workplace and have options open
 and he was upset that women weren't playing sports
 to the degree that I felt that these sports were creating benefits for them.
 I started to articulate this
 and I started talking to my dissertation advisers about doing this and their first reaction was:
 "Warren, the women's movement is just a fad,"
 and I said: "I think not, I think this is the beginning of change
 of the gender roles of men and women ".
 I talked to them about this and finally convinced them that I could change my dissertation
 and that led me to be seen now as a receptive man
 at a time when the feminist movement
 I was getting a lot of accusations of hating men
 so I served the purpose that here is a man of flesh and blood who stands up for what we stand for,
 gets up and says what we say, it's going to be harder to label them "man haters."
 I started doing that so I started doing that
 And I ended up talking all over the world about women's issues
 and the value of women having sufficient confidence and competence
 to be able to share the burdens of earning the bread that men have.
 And that was my focus until the mid-seventies
 and in the mid-seventies I began to see that the feminist movement had made a lot of progress
 and everyone was signing up, at least those who were high up in the middle class and educated.
 But there were also a huge number of divorces going on
 and I started to say that it is important for the children
 having both parents after the divorce.
 Betty Friedan and Gloria Steinem and a woman named Karen DeCrowe agreed with me
 but the ONM, I was on the ONM Board at the time,
 had been elected as a result of work for the Board of ONM
 and my colleagues on the current Board said:
 "We have a dilemma
 and the dilemma is that there are women who are writing to us saying that they are going to leave the ONJ
 if they do not have the option to determine what happens to the children after the divorce
 and we don't want to lose members because it's not only important for family purposes
 but for the rest of the agendas we have. "
 I said: "The important thing is not the rights of women or men,
 the important thing is to know what is best for the children ",
 and they said, "Yeah Warren, cool theory, but we really need to focus on
 empower women across a broad spectrum. "
 They ended up voting in terms of
 give women the option to be fully involved with their children
 or not to depend on the appearance that women are the ones who know their children best
 and therefore they know what is best for their children.
 So the ONJ and I started to have a significant amount of tension around that idea.
 and Betty Friedan and Gloria Steinem didn't get involved, they weren't on the ONM Board.
 All the other NOM Boards of the country
 started down the path taken by the New York City Board
 and that led to my departure and I also started forming hundreds of men's groups,
 one of whom was joined by John Lennon,
 and that had a huge impact on people in both groups and I started to see what men's pain was.
 I began to articulate the pain of men as well as that of women in my presentations
 And when I was only articulating the pain of women and the challenges of women,
 would almost always receive big ovations
 and maybe an average of three invitations for a new lecture opportunity.
 That was helping me live very well financially but then,
 when I began to integrate the perspectives and feelings of men from men's groups,
 I didn't see those big cheers.
 -Why not?
 - [..] for new conference opportunities it went from three, to two, to one and finally to zero.
 -It seems obvious in some sense that if you are articulating truthfully and carefully
 what would be good for either sex,
 in a sense you have to be articulating what would be good for both of you.
 If you see reality as a battlefield between the sexes and as a zero-sum game,
 we can't have a smart conversation
 about what is good for women or what is good for men.
 We have to have a conversation about what is good for men, and men and women,
 and for women, and men and women.
 What reason did you intuit was the reason why when you talked about these issues you were unpopular?
 Two questions: why do you think that made you unpopular?
 And why did you observe so early that there was something that wasn't exactly kosher
 in relation to the ONJ promoting a particular type of family structure
 and a particular vision of the Rights of Women?
 -I think what happened to me was ...
 When I started to focus on what was best for children and then I started to ...
 We only had a minimal amount of research at the time,
 early seventies
 But we had enough so that I could talk to the Board and when I saw the resistance, the degree ...
 Two things were happening:
 One is we don't want to lose our fan base.
 We never want a woman saying whatever option she wants will be closed to her.
 So I begin to see that the women's movement
 he cares more about women than children.
 That was the first disappointment I had.
 -Your first ethical reason, in a sense, is that when you are talking about families
 and you have to balance the rights and responsibilities of men, women and children,
 it makes sense for you to put the welfare of children first
 and then that of men and women as individuals or perhaps even as a couple below that.
 -Yes, exactly what I was saying is that freedom of choice is wonderful.
 But when you exercise your freedom of choice to have a child,
 then you begin to prioritize the child's needs.
 And you knew those needs were going to be the child's needs first
 when you made that free choice.
 It's not like you've been coerced or pressured into making that choice.
 You freely chose to have a child
 that incorporates the need to put the child's perspective before yours, that is part of your free choice.
 -The freedom there is the freedom to accept a certain type of relatively permanent responsibility
 and then stick to that, come hell or storm essentially, from now on.
 -That children should not respect the needs of their parents,
 because part of what I've talked about in La Crisis de los Chicos is that ...
 Everyone has to be happy in a family
 and part of choosing (having) a child to be responsible
 is to choose the child not only to have their needs met
 but also worry about what their mothers and fathers need as well.
 And that has to be primary and introduced early.
 And on the other hand, I also felt and Betty Friedan too,
 that the women's movement would never go as far as it could
 Unless men were equally involved
 and proud to be involved in the role of father because a woman ..
 A woman who wants to break glass ceilings
 and go as far as he can but he also wants to have children
 can't do everything if the man is working full time
 and she is working full time
 or the children are abandoned
 or something has to change.
 Women often tell me:
 "I want to be a great woman" and I say, "You can be a great woman.
 Find a man who wants to be at home all the time with the children and let's reorganize society.
 We say that men are not only warriors we praise and call heroes
 when they go to war and die for us
 they are also warriors if you choose a man who wants to be fully involved with the son.
 Let us honor and respect him because we know that the social bribes we gave to men to die
 They allowed them to be willing to sacrifice their lives in exchange for being called a hero.
 If we rethink being a parent as being a different kind of hero,
 Men will follow, because men basically go where the praise goes.
 -So in the seventies you began to promote the case of the children,
 and also to some degree simultaneously, the case of parents
 and you received some resistance as a result of that.
 It sounds like the way you are organizing the argument is that the conflict ..
 What was the conflict?
 Was it that the women who were being attracted to the ONJ
 did they want unlimited freedom of choice for themselves in all circumstances?
 The reason I ask is because if you have children,
 obviously half of the children you have are women
 And you would assume that if it were a question of what
 women open up to what is best for women in any way in the medium to long term,
 that the concerns about daughters would be perhaps,
 even if they are not concerns about children,
 it would be the concerns about daughters that would take precedence over the concerns of the mother.
 I still don't understand I understand why you weren't succeeding, because it doesn't make sense.
 -There were two things happening simultaneously,
 one was a very strong emphasis on freedom, and it manifested itself in two areas. One was the area of ​​divorce.
 In divorces, women frequently said:
 I don't like my husband, I want to start a new life,
 I want to be able to change state if I want to get a job that I want.
 Or: my new husband or boyfriend wants to leave the State and I want my children or son to come with me because ...
 And I know what is best for my son, which would be like the medical community saying:
 we don't want women to participate in the medical community
 because we know what is better for the patient
 and not that women could make a separate contribution.
 On the other hand there were women who wanted to have freedom
 to be able to have children without being married
 so fifty-three percent of women under thirty today,
 who have children in the US, have children without being married
 and the belief was, again, that women knew what was best for children
 so they could accept the challenge if they wanted to
 and if they didn't find a man they wanted to be with, they could raise the child or children on their own.
 -Part of that was driven by questioning the need for the nuclear family
 as the smallest viable unit and part of ..
 -A) That is correct and B),
 the feminist community started ..
 When I went to feminist meetings there were many books about Lenin
 and the nuclear family being the (?) patriarchal who was oppressing women.
 I think the feminist movement developed out of two huge iterations:
 one was the Civil Rights Movement, in which there was an oppressor and an oppressed.
 Then it was the civil rights movement not only but after this movement came along,
 Marxism arrived and the belief that they were oppressed and oppressors, among Marxists.
 And much of the feminist movement, early feminism.
 We had groups like Redstockings and many other groups like that,
 there were feminists of the Socialist Workers Party style,
 who believed in Marxism and had the dichotomy of oppressor versus oppressed.
 So when you had to explain to men,
 because we earn more because our biological and socialized responsibility
 is to earn money and provide that way,
 the feminist movement saw the fact that we made more money
 once we had kids so therefore
 we must be oppressors like the bourgeois of Marxism and women must be the oppressed.
 You have two things happening simultaneously:
 this belief that oppressors want to be equally involved with children
 and that, second, the men had no idea why they were worth;
 third, the few men who studied the value of being a father and how important it was to children,
 they did not speak and women cannot hear what men do not say
 so we had this world where women were sharing the burden of earning their bread
 but no one was interested in asking
 whether men could share the burden of women in providing equally for the family
 and women weren't even interested in that because they were so focused on their freedom
 and they saw men as oppressors,
 so there was no room to articulate the value of parents in a family.
 -Your terminology is interesting also because
 you're attributing the desire of the women they were pushing against what you were saying, say,
 you are attributing it to a desire for freedom
 but it seems to me that you could easily use irresponsibility as terminology there.
 Because freedom without interest in the medium to long-term consequences of your actions, especially,
 when you are communicating with minors,
 when you are communicating with children, that is not freedom, that is irresponsibility.
 -That's absolutely irresponsible
 And that's where we as a society have failed to say:
 first, when either sex wins, that is, a woman gets custody, for example,
 when either sex wins, both sexes lose.
 And it's worse than that:
 when either sex wins, both sexes lose and in the case of the family, the children lose enormously.
 And we also need to understand what exactly it is
 which leads to children doing better when they have parents involved.
 I started to investigate that and in La Crisis de los Chicos
 I collected over seventy different ways that when children have their father involved
 significantly, they do much better.
 -It would be great if you could detail some now and then we go back to ideological political history.
 One of the things that happened in Ontario recently
 is that our government has introduced legislation
 which is based on the idea that all families are equal
 and the idea behind that, you could argue, is laudable ..
 I wouldn't argue but you could argue
 that people have a variety of ways of solving the problem of having children
 and that there are a variety of viable solutions to that problem
 and that no type of family organization should be privileged above the rest,
 I guess with the exception of multi-spouse marriages
 the ones we haven't yet approved of, let's say.
 The problem with that, as far as I understand,
 is that it appears from research that the nuclear family is the most viable small unit,
 which is not to say there are no single mothers or fathers
 do an admirable job in harsh conditions
 but part of the problem, is a deep problem, is that ...
 When you propose something as a value, you could say:
 we want intact families, mother and father.
 That is the value we are targeting because it seems to be the best for the children,
 then you produce a hierarchy according to that
 and the people who do not conform to that value,
 you can easily argue that they are being discriminated against
 And we are in a situation in our society now where even if discrimination occurs, say,
 for the achievement of admirable value,
 is seen as prejudicial
 and I think that is intensified by the underlying hypothesis that it was anti nuclear family
 in which any kind of hierarchical structure is part of the tyrannical patriarchy,
 it is something like this that underlies.
 Anyway, let's check, if you want,
 I think it would be of great help to everyone,
 some of the many ways that
 it is necessary for children to have parents,
 Why is that better? And maybe for society too, not just for children.
 -Absolutely.
 Girls and boys whose parents have been significantly involved
 they have a number of things in common as a rule,
 and obviously there are investments and not everyone manifests this pattern,
 but the first is that they are much more likely to postpone satisfaction
 and I'll elaborate on that a little bit more.
 Postponing satisfaction is probably the most important quality for being successful,
 and be successful especially having a job that has meaning for you,
 it is one of the most important ingredients to be happy
 and a sense of purpose
 and a sense of motivation
 and a sense of being willing to get up in the morning.
 So in a moment I'll tell how postponing satisfaction happens more when you have a father.
 -Yes, because I'm very interested in hearing about it.
 Second, in this way the father engages with the children significantly
 children are less likely to be depressed;
 they are more likely to be assertive and not aggressive,
 that you normally think men are aggressive,
 but it is more likely that both girls and boys whose parents are involved
 understand the distinction between being assertive and aggressive and choose assertiveness.
 Another thing that surprised me while doing the research was to find that
 boys and girls who have been raised with the father involved are more likely to be empathetic.
 Because I always thought of empathy coming predominantly from mothers,
 and in a moment I'll explain why more comes from mothers
 but why is the result for the child not more empathy,
 the result for the son is less empathy, I'll explain a little more about that later.
 Boys and girls are more likely to drop out of classes if the father does not participate;
 much more likely when a relationship breaks down,
 a child who has not had significant parental involvement is much more likely to be depressed
 and isolate yourself and feel alienated;
 more likely to have a video game addiction;
 more likely to be addicted to video pornography;
 much less likely to have social, emotional skills;
 do worse in each academic area but especially in reading and writing,
 which are the two great predictions of being successful;
 more likely to have a low sperm count;
 And this is a mind-blowing thing that I found out towards the end of the Boys' Crisis investigation,
 I saw in Pediatrics magazine that children who at age nine
 do not have a significant amount of parental involvement,
 both boys and girls were more likely to have shorter telomeres
 and as most of us know,
 telomeres are critical in predicting life expectancy.
 The mean short telomere for a nine-year-old boy or girl without parental involvement
 it was fourteen percent shorter.
 But the telomeres of the boys were forty percent shorter than those of the girls,
 so this was predicting about fourteen percent less life expectancy
 for the middle child without parent involvement
 at the age of nine
 and yet the boys were suffering more.
 Two things fascinated me there,
 if all the things like dropping out and things like that, I wonder,
 maybe this is because the kids whose parents participated simply have better neighborhoods,
 parents earn more, families earn more.
 Maybe it's a question of poverty versus no poverty
 So I started looking at the boys and girls
 who were growing up in "good neighborhoods" with "good schools"
 and comparing them with boys and girls growing up in poor neighborhoods, in poor schools,
 and I saw that the boys and girls
 growing up in good neighborhoods with poor schools that did not have significant father involvement
 they had grown up just like boys and girls growing up in slums with poor schools
 that they did have the father's participation.
 That father's involvement was really such a good prediction of success
 like the quality of the school,
 like the quality of the neighborhood and the socioeconomic class.
 This is what has led to psychologists rallying behind people like Warshaw (?),
 one hundred psychologists and researchers saying:
 this is not a correlation, parent involvement.
 This is not a question of socio-economic issues;
 this is a question of parent involvement,
 especially the involvement of the biological father,
 it actually makes a significant difference.
 We were wrong on the assumption that this was probably just a correlation.
 The more I looked, the more terrible parents I encountered when the parent was not meaningfully involved.
 Before I married Liz, the woman you just met just before you started,
 before we were married fourteen years ago,
 I've been dating a number of women.
 Almost all of them were single mothers and each woman was working her ass off trying to balance her life.
 Each woman used the word in awe of the way she felt,
 almost every woman said: I like that the father participates but,
 and I started to hear the buts of women
 and to listen to men who had wanted to be more involved with their children
 and hear what the differences were between what made men feel like they didn't need them,
 what made them feel left out and why the women felt they needed not to involve the father
 And I saw this bunch of misunderstandings
 and if I hope La Crisis de los Chicos does something, it is to explain:
 here are the ten most important things parents do,
 or make women feel like they are not protecting their children adequately
 or make women feel like they are not protecting their children adequately
 that when they understand the purpose of these things
 And when the parents have done their homework long enough
 as to articulate for mothers the purpose of these things,
 we will realize that these things are necessary ingredients in the life of a girl or boy.
 -That's a good place to go.
 You have described a number of reasons,
 a number of consequences of fatherlessness
 and we will return to the causal relationship between what men do
 and its beneficial results but if you could tell us what men do at the microscopic level
 then we can go back to the causal link between that and the positive results
 And you said those caused problems at home too.
 -Yes, an example would be:
 the father is making a fuss with the children and the mother is looking around and thinking:
 When should i interfere? When should it not interfere?
 And the mother saying:
 "Jimmy, please, keep the children away from the sideboard, keep them away from the sofa
 because they could hit their heads there.
 Why don't you wait for tomorrow when you can go outside? I would feel better "
 and the mother is thinking that she should not overprotect
 and that at the same time he feels that he has to watch over the husband as he does over the husband with the children, and thinks:
 "Sooner or later an accident is going to happen and I'm going to get mad at myself for not being more strict,
 but on the other hand, it seems that the children are having a good time so I should leave them to theirs. "
 -There is a psychobiologist named Jaak Panksepp
 who is one of the best biological psychologists
 and studied dramatic play in animals.
 Rats, for example, a large part of the socialization process,
 which is key to the development of the prefrontal cortex in juvenile male rats in particular,
 emerges and matures as a consequence of dramatic play.
 And one of the things that Panksepp discovered,
 and this is really a mind-blowing thing is that if you pair two rats
 and you let them play repeatedly,
 the big rat will dominate the little rat to begin with,
 in the first fight.
 But if the big rat doesn't let the little rat win
 like thirty percent of the time repeatedly, then the little rat won't play anymore.
 What results is an emerging game-centered morality,
 even among rats, as a consequence of dramatic games.
 I did a fair amount of research on dramatic games, twenty or fifteen years ago,
 and it is really clear that dramatic play helps children know the parameters of their bodies;
 so they know how much they spread
 and also what limits are there in physical interactions with another person;
 what is fun, provocative, what is taking it too far, what is painful;
 and of course children love to play too.
 They die to play
 and we have taken it from kindergartens, Primary education, Secondary
 and we have prohibited it.
 And what Panksepp also discovered was
 that if you eliminated opportunities for juvenile rats to participate in dramatic play,
 would show symptoms that would be analogous to attention deficit disorder in human boys
 and that you could treat it with Ritalin in the same way in rats as in boys.
 That theme of dramatic games ..
 You might also think, a question is:
 Why might a mother distrust dramatic games?
 And part of that could be boy sensitivity
 but a big part of that is also her confidence in the father,
 because they make a lot of noise and fuss,
 And if you trust that act of masculinity that plays hard
 then she will stay out of the way and let the fun happen.
 But if there is mistrust in the family,
 then she will be between the children and the father
 And he won't get involved that way
 and then it will disconnect and I have seen that happen in many families.
 There is the dramatic game, that is important, what else do you see?
 -Let me develop the evolution of how these games work, all dimensions,
 the slippery slope it leads to (its lack).
 What neither the mother nor the father know
 is that these dramatic games lead to the kind of things you just mentioned,
 which are also evident in elephants and so on.
 It also leads to the distinction in which a child is able to distinguish between assertiveness and violence.
 So the child begins, for example,
 to kick the father in an inappropriate place
 or putting a finger in his eye or pulling his hair and the father says:
 "You can fake eye contact to the left
 and then move to the right to win this match
 Or you can do this, this and this
 but you can't do these things and if you do these things, we will end the game. "
 -There is a very important issue, two things there:
 imagine one of these fights is like a dance
 and the meaning of the dance is that both people are having a good time while it happens,
 because otherwise it is not playing.
 As soon as either side is not having a good time, you have exited the biological function of the game circuit.
 Basically, what you tell the child by laying down those rules is:
 we can physically interact within a very limited set of parameters
 and what you have to learn is to be a very sophisticated player within that set of parameters
 and you want to learn how to push the limits.
 Because the most fun dramatic games are on the edge between assertiveness and aggression.
 You can see children
 I used to work in daycare when I was little, when I was eighteen / nineteen,
 And the children lined up to play with me
 back then it was allowed, and they were so desperate to play it was ridiculous.
 I could really tell the difference between the children
 who had participated in that type of game and those who had not.
 And the ones that weren't painfully rare
 and they would hurt themselves and you when you fought with them:
 they would put their thumb in your eye ..
 And they would cry frequently also when they were surprised but not hurt.
 Because they couldn't tell the difference between just being startled and being hurt,
 so they were fragile and that also made them bad playmates.
 What is also so interesting about that is
 that Piaget talked about this when he talked about the development of children,
 is that the more sophisticated the dramatic game
 and sophisticated cognitive game that emerges say between five and seven
 and then with cognitive play, older than that,
 is that unless you got that underlying psychomotor dance built in,
 you don't proceed in a sophisticated way at those higher levels of play
 because other people don't want to play with you.
 Dramatic play, the importance of that can hardly be overrated.
 -And the perspective here is that
 when you build a system in which you have said that men are part of the Patriarchy,
 whose desire is to dominate women and create rules that benefit them at the expense of women,
 you have a perspective, an emotional situation
 that is not favorable to men saying: this is what I am worth.
 Or the women saying:
 let me review what are the rules of being a mother and father
 That lead to the best of you and the best of me.
 We have jumped from an inherent sense of "father knows best" to "father doesn't know" ..
 The process that I will tell in a moment,
 what does dramatic play lead to
 And the slippery slope that exists when it doesn't happen
 is what has not even been developed
 as a possibility to be articulated in this culture at this time.
 -I also think that if you have a partner
 who played a lot as a child,
 that couple cannot tell the difference between a loud row and aggression.
 And if there is a hypothesis about domination and Patriarchy as the underlying foundation
 then there is going to be conceptual confusion about physical interactions
 who have the appearance of submission and dominance because that is part of the routine of dramatic play.
 That is going to be seen through a lens of tyrannical interaction rather than just fun.
 You can see the difference because if the children are playing dramatically,
 they are incredibly excited about it
 and participating and laughing and they will play until they drop exhausted because they need it, they need it so much.
 But that is something difficult to observe from the outside if you are not used to it.
 -If you don't have that perspective of
 Men and fathers being of value to begin with, absolutely not.
 -This is perhaps what would be helpful for a mother to understand, than dramatic play ..
 Now we know how children distinguish between being assertive and aggressive
 but a number of other things also happen during that game,
 which is that it is a bond that is created between the father and the son and in almost every ..
 Doing expert witness work to help children have both parents after divorce,
 I have observed over fifty families, and usually, the father interacting with the children.
 In almost every case, I think, that I have seen, this loop is used by the parent to say things like:
 "You don't play anymore.
 Do your homework, your homework,
 get ready to go to bed, brush your teeth too
 and at nine it is time to go to bed.
 When you have done all that you will have between then and nine
 for you to have more fun with dramatic games
 or reading your favorite story or whatever you prefer, it's your choice.
 -Panksepp, with his work,
 discovered that rats would work to enter a play area because play ..
 Panksepp established very clearly that there is a primary game circuit in mammals.
 It is a separate psychobiological circuit;
 It's not exploration, it's another entirely different motivational drive.
 But the activity on that circuit is inherently enjoyable
 and part of that seems to be because it's so important to proper socialization
 which is prized by children and social mammals as inherently valuable.
 It makes perfect sense that that could be used as a primary reward source,
 and I think your comments about the man and the boys bonding through play
 It is also very important because one of the things I do with young men that ...
 I think young men tend to be partially alienated
 since they are nine month old babies
 because they are not really equipped to know what to do with them.
 They can learn and they can be proficient at it but it is not their natural mastery of mastery.
 But once a child is nine months old
 and begins to be able to imitate and hit and play and respond to gentle taunts,
 that's the perfect time for the father to come into play,
 which is a great help for a mother, by the way, who wants to have another child,
 and really start building a relationship that is based on
 that interesting combination of lots of fun
 and the necessary interactions that are necessary as a precursor to that
 and if you interfere with that then you prevent the father from liking his children.
 Because that's how you start to like them, playing.
 It is vital, it is vitally important.
 -Absolutely and thank you.
 The additional perspective you bring is enriching.
 -There is a book called Affective Neuroscience
 written by Jaak Panksepp, it's on my reading list, on my website.
 And I would totally recommend it.
 because it describes the findings of the animal literature on the primary game circuit.
 I should have won a Nobel Prize
 Discovering a new motivational system in the brain is a huge contribution.
 The other thing he did that was so cool
 and it reminded me a bit of Jean Piaget's work is that
 solidly proposed that an ethic emerges from play
 And that's why I was so interested when you mentioned that
 interactions with the father actually increase empathy.
 Because if someone has empathy for you,
 that can lead to a certain type of narcissism because you are always the center of attention.
 You are not empathetic unless you learn that you are not more important than the next person,
 particularly, the person you are playing with.
 Let's continue with what the parents are doing.
 In the dramatic game,
 what happens is that the bond that is created by the parent allows the parent to say:
 "We will continue the game between eight thirty and nine if you have done everything."
 The child learns to postpone satisfaction
 by doing what he loves to do there, at that moment, which is to play,
 and deal with what you have to deal with before you are rewarded with what you need.
 -That's interesting, you think ...
 We don't know much about the origin of the conscientious factor,
 which is in part the ability to delay satisfaction.
 And after intelligence,
 is the best indicator of long-term success in life,
 especially in management, administrative, algorithmic positions.
 It is not associated with creativity but that is a separate issue.
 Your hypothesis is that the main way that men are socializing that
 is to use work to play, as a bridge.
 -That game creates a bond.
 Much of the problem is when mothers frequently say:
 you have to do this and that and this and that.
 The mother is seen by the child as the disciplinarian,
 who is always asking him or her to do things
 and the seeds of rebellion start to appear, something like:
 How much of myself am I going to show?
 How many things my mother does will I do?
 Do I want to be a mama's boy?
 You feel like you are being held back by so many rules.
 But with the father, or the mothers who play dramatically with their children,
 a bond is created and you want to return to that connection.
 It's like a child riding a roller coaster
 where you know there is a lot of fun and a lot of security.
 You trust the father to combine both
 and you want to go back to that so you are willing to focus on doing what you need to do:
 your homework, chores, brushing your teeth or whatever,
 To get what you want, which is to postpone satisfaction.
 Let us now consider the slippery slope caused by the lack of this.
 -Let me add one thing to that.
 What's so cool about that is that you've also given some really smart advice for parents.
 Say, BF Skinner, who was the famous animal behavior analyst,
 clearly demonstrated that you could train animals with rewards more effectively
 than with threats or punishments.
 Threats and punishments are necessary,
 obviously we would not have biological systems observing those emotions if they were not necessary.
 But the reward is more difficult to use because you have to pay much more attention
 and intervene when something good happens, so you really have to be watching.
 But your hypothesis is:
 parents, spend time playing with your children and have whatever fun you can with them
 because by forming that bond you can use it as the source of reward
 that will be appreciated by the child in terms of disciplinary strategies.
 It's a double win:
 One, it's fun and you will like your children and have fun with them;
 but the second is:
 you have a very positive means of disciplining them in the best sense, encouraging and disciplining them.
 That's a really useful practical thing.
 -Increase the confidence of children, as if you were playing in the limit you mentioned,
 but there is dad to make sure the fun
 it is not excessive for you, for him, for your sister and others.
 That is happening at the same time.
 -True, you can see it in two ways: that is embodied trust.
 If you throw a small child in the air and catch it, it is a lot of fun for them.
 Both being released because of the threat, but then the relief they feel because of the security that is there.
 It is not abstract, it is proven.
 -Or parents throwing the child and then "fail to catch it" and the child falls on the bed.
 And he has this feeling of: "Nobody held me, you were going to do it but ...".
 -Yes, that shows that there are things that can happen that are not exactly what you predicted
 but within the confines of a trusting relationship, that's fine.
 And then you can also imagine,
 if the father is playing with more than one child at the same time,
 he is also acting as a referee.
 Then the children learn how to be judicious in the distribution of attention,
 they learn how to play fair,
 learn how everyone can have a turn
 and everyone wins at the same time.
 -And that union is part of what it creates,
 everything you just said,
 it is part of what leads the child to have empathy training.
 And the empathy training comes from: "No, you've been too hard on your sister there.
 If you play again, you can't be that tough. And if you continue to be so harsh .. ".
 -Game over. True, the game stops when someone is not having a good time.
 When my children were little
 we had this sofa that was divided into six parts.
 We could put the sofas face to face
 and then we would put the rear ends around it, so it was a little fighting ring.
 Then he would put the children in there and they would fight to the point of exhaustion.
 But one of the things I used to do was:
 if one of the two was hard on the other and cried,
 then I realized that the one who had made the other cry was not looking at the crying child,
 they looked away and avoided him.
 -He always used to say: "No, no, no, look. Look and see what happened."
 Because that triggers that embodied empathy
 and then you can easily have a conversation and say:
 "Is this how you want the game to work or do you want everyone to have a good time?"
 And the thing is that once the child looks,
 then they know, because they cannot escape that empathic identification.
 -When the son does not have that,
 we have all this data now,
 these seventy different areas where children do much worse when their father is not involved.
 Let's look at the next phase of that.
 When that father doesn't play dramatically,
 as an example of many,
 and is not imposing limits,
 the child does not learn to postpone satisfaction.
 We have solid data on this,
 that children raised predominantly by parents
 they have only a fifteen percent chance of having ADHD.
 Children raised predominantly by mothers
 they have a thirty percent chance of having ADHD.
 If we look at what we just talked about,
 children raised by parents
 they are learning that they have to postpone that satisfaction
 to get the reward they want.
 Bring that ability to postpone satisfaction to school:
 the child who does not know how to postpone the satisfaction to which they assign homework,
 is frequently distracted by an incoming message, by the opportunity to play video games,
 for wanting to exchange notes with other children,
 distracted, distracted, distracted ...
 -What has the distraction is that it does not require explaining ADHD.
 The need is to explain why not all boys and girls have it.
 And the answer is the answer you just described, is that some boys and girls ..
 Distraction does not require an explanation
 because people are distracted by what they reward immediately.
 It is like addiction; in fact, addiction doesn't require an explanation either.
 What requires explanation is the development of resources
 that allow you to endure addictive pressures in the face of the fact that they are everywhere and powerful.
 It is the development of control that is really the interesting problem.
 I have never heard anyone connect using the game
 as a reward and to postpone satisfaction,
 that's a very interesting idea. It is very interesting.
 -Let me take it a step further.
 When postponing satisfaction is happening, or not happening,
 and then the child is not able to finish homework,
 You start to feel ashamed of yourself.
 Or if he is athletic, and his parents believe that it will be of great help if the girl or boy has big dreams:
 "Do you want to play in the NBA?
 You are tall and if you keep practicing you can play in the NBA, you can fulfill your dreams. "
 But if you don't postpone satisfaction,
 not able to do the boring repetitions that are necessary for any success,
 Including being an Olympic star or playing in the NBA or whatever.
 -Or play the piano or learn to read or ..
 -Great example, certainly the violin.
 Whatever your dream is, the bigger the dream, the bigger the disappointment.
 He's not just afraid of the disappointment he thinks his parents will feel
 but also the feeling that you can do something at school,
 his teachers, his classmates are not respecting him much; the cheerleaders pass him,
 (unintelligible).
 The boy is starting to feel ashamed.
 -This is the prerequisite for shame:
 Let's say you're drawn to a goal
 naturally, and maybe that is influenced by your parents or is influenced by your peers
 but it is something that you naturally direct your attention to, it grabs you in a sense.
 We will assume that it is a difficult target,
 So there is an ethic that emerges from that which is that if that goal is valuable and it is difficult,
 then there are sacrifices that have to be made,
 it is necessary to implement the action of postponing satisfaction
 so that you are worthy of achieving that goal.
 That is part of the game if you think of it as a game.
 If you find yourself unable to play within the rules of the game,
 So how can you not suffer shame and hate yourself?
 You have adopted an ethical perspective which is: this is worth achieving.
 And if you observe in yourself the inability to achieve it,
 because you are constantly distracted then you are going to feel hatred for yourself.
 The way out of there, and this is something I learned from Nietzsche,
 this is how terrible it contains,
 because it is a path to nihilism;
 Let's say that you propose four objectives in succession, which are valuable to you
 and then you find yourself unable to discipline yourself to achieve the objectives.
 After four successive failures,
 It's like what Homer Simpson said to Bart:
 "You tried and failed and then you tried and failed again. What have you learned?"
 and Homer says to Bart:
 "The conclusion is:
 never try. "
 And if you fail a few times to achieve something important because you see that you have no discipline,
 So the logical response is to stop setting goals.
 -And that is exactly what happens but we have, thanks to technology,
 a perfect kind of exit and that exit is to video games
 where you can identify with a hero
 and you can lose in the game as often as you want without anyone noticing.
 According to improvements with certain mechanics,
 you can play that game with certain types of people and improve your skill set in the game
 but you are never able to translate that into daily life.
 You start to have an addiction to that game
 that are designed to increase your amount of dopamine without having to get anything.
 -What video games have that is different ..
 A game for a young child has to pay off immediately.
 That is why dramatic play works, for example it has to pay off immediately.
 The game resembles real life but as long as it resembles,
 what happens is that the rewards are postponed,
 and you become more and more disciplined in not being rewarded immediately,
 like when you are learning to read or play the piano, for the long term goal.
 What video games have is that they require skill development.
 But the immediate reward accompanies the deferred reward.
 Because otherwise the game would not be fun for someone who is learning.
 But the problem is that many real life games
 they are not necessarily fun while you are learning them.
 Because you have to achieve a certain level of mastery and that requires discipline.
 That is what is wrong with the idea that
 children can simply learn according to what spontaneously catches their attention.
 There is part of the truth in that because,
 Why not follow the interests of a child?
 But the problem is that many efforts that require great skill,
 practically any effort that will be of economic or productive profit,
 requires grueling learning, there is a lot of purely disciplinary repetition.
 And then one more dimension of that is that according to the boy he grows up to be interested in girls,
 if you start to feel that you are straight,
 notices that girls are much more interested in dating quarterbacks,
 or the student body president or the type of artist
 that are valued in schools and life in general.
 You start to feel isolated and feel like you can't attract those girls,
 especially those who are more biologically addicted, pretty girls,
 the cheerleader type, and begins to isolate himself in porn.
 A little porn is not a big deal
 But porn is basically based on dopamine increasing with each new stimulus.
 As you latch onto that dopamine,
 he begins to get hooked on only being able to be stimulated when more risks are taken.
 Finally, he succeeds and gets a girl / woman
 walks by her house and is sexual with her.
 He is so incapable of being excited perhaps by the light touch on a hand,
 or get excited by what you are saying and the interaction,
 or some combination of the drama of being with her with a little touch.
 He is so used to such a large amount of stimuli that occur and when he trusts her he says:
 Can you be this You can do this? Can you act like this?
 And she feels like she is just a piece of object that is replacing porn
 and finally feels disgusted by him, walks away and he begins to say:
 this convinces me that I am as useless as I thought.
 And the only thing that will satisfy me is going back to porn
 and what was a little addiction gets bigger
 and simultaneously becomes addicted to video games at the same time.
 All of that is the slippery slope from the dramatic play,
 that the father is not capable of articulating to the mother the value of that;
 combined with the confidence you were integrating with that;
 combined with the lack of link;
 combined with teaching to postpone satisfaction.
 When not taught to postpone satisfaction,
 slippery slope leads to shame, self-loathing
 and afraid that if you try something,
 He is only going to prove to himself and everyone around him that he is one more failure.
 And the degree to which you articulate the desire to try something
 is the public announcement to a group of people who will say:
 "Today I will try this and tomorrow it will be a failure"
 until he's ashamed of himself.
 In worst case scenarios this can lead to such depression
 that creates a suicide wish and to believe what we see in school shooters.
 -That creates resentment.
 Absolutely, buddy, that creates resentment and anger galore.
 -Who are they resentful and angry with?
 Who are the people who have rejected it?
 They are the classmates, they are the teachers; no one appreciates the sweet sensitivity inside him.
 "I'm so mad at that
 And someday I'll have the desperate need to get their attention and say:
 I count, I matter, pay attention to me. "
 In the worst cases, only a small percentage,
 You can understand how the school shootings emerged from there.
 -For every boy who goes to shoot in a school there are a thousand who fantasize in that direction.
 At first it is something like:
 "I am angry with people because they do not see the value in me"
 But if they get to the point where they fantasize with extreme violence,
 They've been through it for so long that they've developed a real hatred for everything.
 And a desire to see it shattered.
 That is the most terrible of the possible results that can be generated.
 You've talked about dramatic play and postponing satisfaction
 you've added empathy.
 Are there other cardinal things you are seeing parents do?
 That's pretty early in life
 you are looking at interaction with children between one year and seven years old, something like that?
 What else do you see happening with parents, both in the early stages and also later?
 -Another important thing is the concept of spending time together.
 For a mother who is listening to this who has a daughter,
 we now know that daughters who have a significant amount of time to hang out with their parents,
 that creates more psychological stability than any other phenomenon.
 With the boys it is also very important.
 For example, let's say you are in a divorce situation.
 and a father is with the son for a short period of time, on Saturday,
 and picks up his son from a soccer game.
 And he says to Josh: "How was the game?"
 and a boy especially is more likely to say:
 "Good, it was good."
 "Tell me more, Josh."
 "It was just okay, dad."
 So if at that time,
 the father has to leave the child at the mother's house because visiting time is over,
 there is nothing that happens beyond that.
 -And the child will be there, children in particular, although it also happens with couples,
 is that one of the things you would do to the person you are with
 to check if they care
 is withholding some information that might be relevant to see to what degree they care.
 Because if you ask me if I have done something, how was it,
 one of the things I'm going to want to know is:
 Do you really care
 And if you're my father, I'm really going to want to know that.
 One of the ways that I can measure that is by asking you
 but that assumes that your answer is going to be a reflection of your current self and there is no reason to assume that.
 A better way to do it is for me to be a little quiet
 and a little resistant because then I can see, are you going to insist a little?
 Cause that's a fun thing to do if you're a bit of a joker
 you can tap him on the chest a few times and say:
 "Kid, let go and talk to me."
 And normally if you do that with a boy, even a teenager,
 They will laugh and put your hand away and say "Go away, Daddy" but are glad to have that extra insistence.
 Take them out of their shell and it's a demonstration that the boy does, in fact, care.
 And you need time for that.
 That boy, if he did well, or she did well,
 is very happy to say:
 "I scored three goals today, that is much more than they have scored in the history of our school.
 Isn't it amazing? "
 No problem, they will share that directly.
 But the reason to hesitate to say something that embarrasses them,
 I remember a father saying that his son came home and had been the doorman the week before.
 But the following week he had not been chosen to be a goalkeeper and he could not understand why.
 So he hesitates to say anything to his father because he doesn't want the father to lecture him;
 or think you are a failure; or to be disappointed;
 or have that feeling of:
 "This is not my son, I want my son to score the goals."
 With all these fears, especially the child in terms of performance, any failure will be silenced.
 If the father leaves the child at the mother's house, that is never fixed.
 If the father has time to spend with the children,
 say, doing homework together,
 the father is watching TV and the child is doing homework
 and then they go at the same time to take something out of the fridge,
 and they have a discussion about what he wants for dinner
 and the father asks for help to make dinner,
 instead of the child sitting around and having no responsibility,
 something parents tend to do.
 They ask the children to help prepare dinner, not just serve it.
 In that process of the child cutting things off and doing that kind of boring thing, the child will tend to say:
 "I was a goalkeeper last week but not this week. What's up with that?"
 And the child may say that to his mother, even faster,
 but the expectations of the child with the mother is that the mother will secure the child and tell him:
 "It's okay, you're fine, you're wonderful, you're a great goalkeeper.
 Maybe the coach wanted to give the other kids a chance because you're so good, etc. "
 While you can expect a little more confrontation from parents, more questions.
 -One of the things I have observed when talking to my clinical clients about their intimate relationships is:
 I've been trying to measure simple rules
 for the minimum interaction time necessary to maintain a relationship.
 With couples I have observed that
 they need at least one or two sessions of intimate time together a week, something like that,
 or things start to fall apart but they also need, as far as I understand,
 about ninety minutes of communication time in a week
 just to keep the other updated in relation to their stories.
 Two questions, one is: do you have any idea how you would characterize spending time together?
 And how much does it have to be in order not to go down to a dangerous minimum?
 And the other thing that I would like that I would like to develop is
 that you've talked a bit about the most combative approach a parent can take
 when he discusses a fault or a defect, or something like that, on the part of the child.
 I want to share something that I have learned by talking to
 mostly male audiences in the last year and a half, two years,
 about responsibility and discipline and all that.
 You may think that telling someone your faults is harsh and critical.
 And it is, in a sense, but it's not harsh and critical about its potential.
 If your son comes and says: "I screwed up and this is what I did that didn't go so well",
 And you say, "That's fine, you're a wonderful boy"
 so the kid is stuck in trouble because they don't feel so wonderful, and they've failed.
 But if you say, "That was stupid. What's your problem?
 This is what you could do.
 You can do better than this, put your life in order.
 Let's think of some strategies so you can think about how that is not going to happen to you again. "
 Instead of putting your faith in who the kid is right now,
 which I would say is in some sense the brand of impulsive empathy,
 you put your faith in who the kid could be and that's cheering.
 And I would say that in failure circumstances,
 especially where the child is motivated to try again,
 giving the child courage overcomes impulsive empathy without looking at the cards
 as an indicator of faith in who the child might be.
 -It takes time for the child to reveal his vulnerability and also to have a faith that the father ..
 The child tends to open like a flower when she or he realizes that
 the security that the father is creating by being with them and talking about that problem is there.
 In an ideal situation, a wise parent will not immediately provide a solution.
 They will ask the child something like:
 "What do you think happened in terms of last week in contrast to this?"
 What do you think the coach's intentions were?
 Often within the child
 there is an idea of ​​what probably happened but a fear of acknowledging it,
 and especially, recognize him in front of anyone because they will not have respect for him.
 Being able to have time to be together
 it allows enough time to feel those long arms of security and affection surrounding him or her.
 The fact that the father is not going to give up in time will be there for the child.
 Then when the parent facilitates the exploration within themselves
 about what the problem could be, helping him in a rogerian way (Carl Rogers)
 to find the part of him that knows the answer.
 Then the boy is experiencing both the respect and the willingness to confront:
 "If I don't have the answer inside of me, my father will tell me the truth about what I need to do now.
 And by telling me the truth about what I need to do
 It is his way of respecting me without saying that he is respecting me
 because he wouldn't be telling me the truth if he didn't respect me.
 -Not me specifically,
 If I didn't respect my intrinsic ability to overcome obstacles and grow.
 Which is the best answer for someone who says:
 "I have a problem" is: "I have faith that you can overcome it."
 Not that you don't have a problem or that you're fine the way you are.
 There's another thing that you talk about that agrees with,
 I'd say standard but relatively profound clinical wisdom
 what is what
 people are much more likely to follow a set of injunctions if they generate them themselves.
 We have had some really interesting experiences with the program we designed called
 Future Authoring Program, and helps people design a life plan.
 They have to develop a vision for their operations the six or seven basic dimensions of life
 like intimate relationships and family
 and career and education ambitions
 and resistance to temptation, drugs and alcohol;
 take care of yourself physically and mentally and so on,
 those fundamental dimensions;
 productive use of time away from work.
 To ask themselves what they want to have
 if they could have what they wanted and needed
 according to those domains, three to five years forward;
 develop a vision based on that set of wills and desires,
 and also write an opposite view.
 Which is: where could you be if you allow yourself to fail catastrophically?
 What would that look like in three or five years?
 And then produce a plan and it has had impressive effects,
 young men fare worse than young women in academic settings.
 The program does not seem to have as much of an effect on young women but that could be because they are doing better now,
 but it has an impressive effect on young men.
 In fact, in a trades house environment, the latest data we have,
 that were published last year,
 shows that we can reduce the number of men who drop out of college,
 especially aimless men who haven't done very well in high school.
 We can reduce your churn rate by fifty percent.
 One of the things that I have observed about young men,
 and this may be because they are less personable in confrontations than young women,
 is that unless they have formulated their own plan,
 they are unlikely to do anything.
 I think it's also true with women too, you want to talk to them and tell them:
 "What do you think about what happened and how are you going to get out of there?"
 What is an excellent question
 because it tells the child: you can think about what happened and be precise,
 and you can think of a way out of the problem.
 That's cheering and that's what you want
 you don't want to protect or shelter your child,
 you want to cheer him up.
 That collaborative problem solving is a great way to do that.
 -I've been watching this over and over again,
 And certainly the data I've obtained for The Boys' Crisis shows that too.
 Spending time together is part of what helps to do that.
 but also the regulations that parenting offers,
 It is vital that mothers and fathers understand them according to what you were saying.
 Mother and father, the boy comes home from school, and the boy says:
 "Mrs. Myers hates me, I'm not doing well at school."
 And maybe the boy is in second or third and the mother's reaction will tend to be something like, "Tell me more."
 The mother will tend to solve it by saying:
 The mother will tend to solve it by saying:
 "Wait until next week.
 I'm going to talk to the principal on Monday and we'll talk about changing your class to a different one from Mrs. Myers. "
 Parents will tend to say to a greater degree:
 "In life you have to learn to get along with people who don't like you.
 What do you think Mrs. Myers is upset about you? "
 And the boy may respond, the father will say:
 "-Do you want me to talk to Mrs. Myers about this? -No, no, no, no, no.
 -If I talk to Mrs. Myers about it, what do you think Mrs. Myers will say? "
 And then the child, under the possible threat of the father or mother talking to Mrs. Myers,
 will start to tell how Mrs. Myers feels
 and then they will negotiate an opportunity to speak with Mrs. Myers
 and get the boy and Mrs. Myers together, have a discussion together,
 to see if the boy and Mrs. Myers can develop an understanding
 in which the child begins to understand that it is not that Mrs. Myers naturally hates Jimmy,
 is that something else is happening.
 The result of working all that
 It is a way of making it easier for the child to discover their own solutions to a problem,
 speaking it instead of receiving a solution, instead of having received the capacity by the system
 and for their parents, who will end up disappearing from the child's life,
 or worse, they will not disappear from the child's life.
 Often the mother says:
 "The boy has a problem.
 Why are you being so insensitive?
 Are you blaming Jimmy for creating this problem?
 He tells you that not only does Mrs. Myers hate him, but other kids hate Mrs. Myers too.
 So it's not Jimmy's fault. "
 The mother will feel that the father is being insensitive
 when, in fact, the parent is being sensitive in another way.
 Sensitive about postponing long-term satisfaction.
 -That's it, and that's a cold virtue.
 Sounds a lot like it's based
 at least in part, in these psychobiological differences between men and women.
 Women have more negative emotion and are more empathetic,
 And that's short-term empathy.
 That is perfectly in accordance with the approximation you just described.
 This is a particularly advantageous approach to very very young children, especially infants.
 Because being properly built to take care of babies.
 The baby is always right, up to nine months of age or perhaps a year.
 The correct answer to your baby if that person is crying is:
 there is something you should do as fast as possible.
 We have talked a bit about what parents can do
 to help your children learn to delay satisfaction and so on.
 We have talked a bit about what mothers can understand about how they can facilitate it and how to trust.
 Maybe we could talk a bit about what families could do
 to improve the efficiency of your boys and girls.
 You've talked a bit in your book about family dinner nights and their importance.
 -We already know that family dinner nights are important
 but what makes family dinner nights even more valuable
 It's when they don't turn into family dinner nightmares.
 And know how to structure them so they don't turn into family dinner nightmares.
 When someone comes to me after a presentation and says:
 "I can't get my children to put down their cell phones during dinner",
 I already know the beginning of the problem,
 which is that the children are in charge of the parents.
 "What can I do to encourage my children to participate, to put down their mobiles?"
 The number one answer is to require them to do so,
 Sitting during dinner is not an option.
 Some nights you will, some you will not.
 But if you're having a family dinner night,
 especially a structured family dinner night,
 Rule number one is no gadgets at dinner.
 If that rule is violated,
 then the appliances are immediately put away for a reasonable period of time
 once the rule is understood.
 -You can imagine that catalyzing wars in various households.
 -Then you start to structure those family dinner nights so that
 everyone have a chance to speak.
 Everyone has a structured amount of time at the beginning
 in which they can tell how their week was or how the week has gone since the last time.
 Everybody knows it's not forty minutes for the rest and one for me,
 That would make the interest of a family dinner night zero to the one with a minute.
 -That is an extension of the idea of ​​a fair game as well and a mediated fair game.
 -The idea that as a family,
 our job is to make sure everyone's needs are being managed,
 They are taken into account and cared for, which is how empathy is created.
 Empathy is not created by a parent who is always empathetic to the child's needs or wants.
 When a parent is always empathetic to needs and wants,
 the child becomes narcissistic, not empathetic.
 That is one of the things we have been wrong about.
 -You can repeat it three or four times and that would be very good.
 Because that's so crucially important because
 if what you are learning is to put the feelings of other people
 at the same level of importance as yours,
 so obviously that's associated very closely with postponing satisfaction,
 with learning to listen, with taking turns,
 fair play, mediated interaction, all that.
 So the other thing that also happens, and you see it with couples, is if they spend that time together.
 Something analogous to family dinner night,
 although I think the idea of ​​the family dinner is very good for reasons that I will mention in a moment.
 Imagine that your family has a story.
 And the story is where we come from, where we are, where we are going together as a unit.
 And then each individual within that story has a story
 And then what you do on those family dinner nights
 that time of interaction, is that you are picking up the individual threads of the story
 and you intertwine them to make collective history,
 and that keeps everyone updated and on the same page
 and able to empathize in a deep way because if I don't know where you are or what your intentions are,
 I can't know what you think or feel.
 I have to know what story you are presenting now and so do you.
 So that you know it and I know it,
 you have to be able to tell your story and I have to be able to ask you about it.
 Then I think the other thing that is very important about potluck
 is that human beings are very rare creatures because we really share food.
 And we are social diners - people don't eat well if they eat on their own.
 So the idea of ​​sharing food is deeply ingrained in us.
 so part of the extended socialization process is
 gather everyone and sit around the food;
 be polite and grateful for the fact that you are food;
 enjoy that but also be able to give and receive while sharing food and that is,
 I would say, if the most fundamental element of socialization
 is something like the embodiment of dramatic play,
 the next layer on top would be the ability to sit
 and share food and have a civilized speech.
 -And a civilized speech really needs ..
 Respect for history is so crucial.
 I teach, as you know, communication courses for couples around the country.
 And one of the dimensions that seems the most important thing that destroys marriages,
 or almost all relationships, is, like a biological propensity,
 the lack of ability to handle personal criticism without being defensive.
 My main task is to teach couples
 how to avoid that biological propensity to be defensive when they hear criticism.
 One of the many steps in that process,
 that's too long to describe now,
 but it is to give you an image of a person, Mario Cuomo,
 the former governor of New York,
 an image made by four artists who created an image on the same site, in the same place.
 And there are four different types of artists who created this image of him,
 like Andy Warhol, Modigliani and others.
 I work with each couple to understand that when you listen to your partner's story,
 even if you are looking at the same thing,
 there will be a different image that is being created by each person at the table.
 So each couple's job is to understand how much each would sacrifice.
 so that the other person lives and how often we are not able to handle personal criticism
 and reorient ourselves before we handle personal criticism
 to go to a place where you are truly fascinated by your partner's story.
 but at the family dinner table that has to happen with every member of the family
 that when person A says:
 "What were you talking about at school?"
 and someone says, "We are talking about the #MeToo movement",
 and person A says: "The #MeToo movement is stupid",
 so person B responds:
 "The #MeToo movement is the best progressive thing that ever happened"
 so it is very important that the person who says it is the best thing that ever happened
 be heard completely by the person who thinks they are stupid and vice versa
 and that there are polite questions that the family teaches its members to ask.
 -Part of that is knowing the story before criticizing it.
 Carl Rogers had good advice on that
 because you probably already know this, but it's worth reiterating for people who don't.
 Rogers' rule when you were listening to someone was:
 don't assume either you or they know what they are talking about or what they are going to say.
 Because people think through speech,
 so you have to give them a chance to say it all before criticizing it
 because they might change their own ideas halfway through.
 That is important, let them formulate the problem before criticizing them
 but the next thing is, I love it, I think it's really useful;
 which is that once the person has developed their story, you have to say:
 "This is what I have heard you say, do you agree with my approach?"
 Because that, first, indicates to the speaker that the listener, in fact, heard
 or if there is an error the speaker can say:
 "No, that's not what I said at all" and then there may be some clarification.
 It also forces the listener not to turn the opponent into a scarecrow
 because it is not only that I had to summarize what you said:
 I have to summarize what you have said in a way that you agree with.
 This is also a useful technique if there is wide variation in verbal ability among participants.
 and it could be due to age, for example.
 Because it could be that even if you are a bit incoherent and clumsy and partial in your approach,
 if i'm a big brother say i might be able to sum it up for you
 in a way that is useful to you from a scaffolding perspective.
 We know that human beings organize their personalities at a high level through narrative
 and that narrative is not only thought, it is spoken.
 You create your personality by speaking in these kinds of shared settings that you are describing.
 And without that your story is fragmented and incoherent and so are you.
 You can see why those ..
 If those shared meals weren't so important,
 people would not have evolved the ability to participate.
 They are central to our social life and abandoning that in the family is really a catastrophe, I think.
 -I agree with everything you just said, absolutely, with each part.
 When you say, "Have I distorted something?"
 Often someone will repeat what they have heard the other person say.
 And you ask: "Have I distorted something?"
 and the person responds: "Yes, I think you have distorted this"
 and the other person will argue and say, "No, I didn't say that."
 and the rule of the game is: the person who is speaking,
 whatever makes them feel heard, that's when you haven't distorted anything.
 And it's your job to listen because the customer is always right.
 -That doesn't mean you have to agree,
 It means that you have to understand the damn story well.
 -That's also important,
 some people make a mistake thinking that if I understand what they have said,
 that means that I agree with them and it doesn't mean that, it just means that you've heard them.
 Part of the purpose of a family dinner is to have the opportunity for someone to offer a personal critique,
 be able to respond to that and that the person who had made that criticism hear that response
 and ask if there is any distortion as to what they heard.
 The biggest challenge for almost everyone,
 I remember they interviewed me once for NPR and said:
 "People who are allied with the men's movement, they seem like prejudiced people."
 I said: "If you call yourself progressive, like liberals do and we do,
 because I consider that I am on the liberal side of most things,
 So our first job is to listen when people feel heard, they stop hating. "
 Hate comes out of a development of not being seen,
 not be heard, be distorted,
 being blamed or caricatured in a negative way before being heard.
 That is the job of every person who calls himself a progressive,
 is to start listening instead of arguing first.
 -At least you can know what to argue about.
 Because one of the things that happens with crystal clear communication in a family
 when stories are told it is: you can identify which are the problems and which are not.
 You could be irritated having to listen to your partner
 awkwardly describing a particular problem
 But if you understand at the same time that they could be ruling out ninety-eight problems
 and focusing on just two, it's worth the wait.
 Another question for you,
 there are people who are not in a position where they cannot have male involvement with their children,
 let's say so what do you recommend for single moms
 who are trying to do the best job possible with their children
 But they have a hard time attracting male attention?
 What do you think they can do?
 -First, to recognize the enormous amount of multifaceted work that you are doing.
 Second, as you look at the differences between what mothers and fathers do,
 ask yourself if there is any way you may not have valued your former husband
 in a way that would allow him to return.
 But if the answer to that question is:
 "I've valued him and can still get him to come back even though he's essentially lazy,"
 excuse my language, these are some options:
 The biggest amount of evidence is that sending your children to be a Cub Scout is a ...
 They have a well-developed program to develop personality motivation,
 integrity, loyalty, a sense of making promises that you keep.
 Very good studies have been done of boys who have participated in Scouting for two years or more.
 But this means not only signing your child up for the Scouts here or there,
 And if your child doesn't like something that happened,
 make sure your child returns to the pen
 and deal with that it shouldn't be a boy's choice to go Scouting or not,
 it is part of your parental responsibilities to take it there.
 Later to the Boyscouts, you don't have to be a Scout,
 some (?) have good programs for young boys;
 Mankind Project has good programs for young boys for the first time,
 they have really good assistance to help kids in regards to their parents.
 Boys Clubs have some good programs with young boys,
 have your child get a good mentor;
 try to take your child to a school that has a significant number of boys
 at the age your child is, especially if your child is very young.
 It is very important that a child does not leave a house with a single mother
 to mainly female schools because the child will start looking for an identity
 from someone who is normally destructive like the leader of a gang.
 That will give you a false identity.
 These are some of many things.
 We often think that a boy needs a male mentor.
 Yes, a boy needs a male mentor.
 Try to evaluate mentors carefully or if you participate in faith-based communities
 And even if you don't believe in God, God or not
 get your child involved in a faith-based community
 where there is a good male counselor who has groups for children, for youth,
 often young people who have problems.
 The ability to be encouraged to express your feelings to other boys
 and see that your child is not isolated in the problems they face.
 But there are many other boys his own age who are having the same problems.
 get her to be able to express her feelings about it, her fears about it,
 have little experiences where he paints a mask of himself
 and what the mask says and what is said under the mask.
 A mentor can greatly encourage a boy to express his feelings
 instead of repressing your feelings in a society.
 And then what we all need and have to do is go out there and say:
 something very harmful has happened in our society in the last fifteen years.
 When I started this job with the government
 with the commission to create a White House Council for Boys and Men,
 I started that after a call from the White House
 asking if he wanted to be an advisor to the White House Council for Women and Girls
 because of my background with the National Organization for Women.
 And I said of course but also a White House Council for Boys and Men is needed.
 For eight years we have been working to make it happen,
 and now we are working with the Trump administration to make it happen,
 and nobody signs up yet
 but the importance of making it happen
 is that there has to be a complete change in attitude and atmosphere
 that we are simply not living in a world dominated by the Patriarchy,
 that the world was dominated by a need to survive.
 Both fathers and mothers sacrifice so much of their lives
 in the hope that their children will have better lives,
 mothers make career sacrifices, fathers make career sacrifices.
 There are very few parents of multiple children
 who follow their own ambitions
 Because the jobs that satisfy you are not jobs that pay well.
 Most of our parents sacrificed their satisfaction
 to do the things they needed to do like be a firefighter or a miner
 or be willing to be expendable and more
 in order to make their generation safer and have more options.
 And that all the sacrifices our parents made
 be called "male privilege" or "male dominance",
 it is completely underestimating men.
 All that attitude ..
 -It is also underestimating women to affirm
 that the entire cultural structure to this day has been patriarchal in origin.
 You can argue about what is the definition of Patriarchy
 but just understand that your father and your grandfather and your great-grandfather,
 they all did the same thing your great-grandmothers did:
 gave their lives in the hope that your life and the lives of their children
 they would be better with more amounts of opportunities.
 And most of them sacrificed a lot:
 my father ran a company and my mother was very unhappy,
 and he ran the company in Europe;
 my mother was very unhappy living in Europe
 rather than in the United States which was more comfortable for her.
 My father finally quit his job
 and sold foam brushes door to door for a year
 to make sure we had enough money,
 at least to go to a state university
 and my mother had a decent home and so did the children.
 -All that was associated with a little bit of gratitude for the past.
 -It really is.
 Instead of criticizing the world as patriarchal or parents as stupid, we should be saying:
 mom, dad, grandfather, grandmother;
 thanks for making our survival mastery enough
 so that we don't have to focus so much on surviving
 But let's not waste our chances blaming men for the world
 they have created that it was destructive.
 We have to understand that we are living fifty percent longer now
 that where we were a hundred and twenty years ago
 and that is the result of all the progress you have made.
 This is why we have worked so hard
 to create this White House Council of Boys and Men.
 We have created a Patreon account to be able to get some money
 to be able to make this happen
 but if it happens through the Patreon account or some other way,
 we need to check the belief of:
 "women like good, men like evil;
 women as the oppressed and men as oppressors "
 and instead of #MeToo monologues, we need to have dialogue.
 Human Resources (HR) centers are becoming HER (she),
 instead of HR (RH), which is focused on her, not him and her.
 We really need to have dialogues at work about what is working for women,
 what is not working for women;
 what is working for men and what is not working for men.
 We need to fundamentally review
 the roles of men, women, and all our gender roles of the past.
 -That's a perfect place to close our conversation.
 I would very much like to talk to you again about,
 probably on the pay gap at some point.
 We have focused a lot on what you have been outlining in this book, in your new book,
 in The Boys' Crisis,
 and I certainly recommend to those who are interested in this type of topic, to buy it.
 It's full of facts and that's nice.
 It focuses on something that is vitally important
 And I think maybe people are starting to recognize it as vitally important.
 I certainly hope so.
 Your work is proving very useful to me
 and I really appreciate the time you spent today talking to me
 and I hope we get another chance to talk again.
 -I'd love to talk about the pay gap.
 It really is impossible to believe that there is no patriarchal world
 if you think that men charge more than women for the same work.
 One has to start with a fundamental understanding that is much more complex than that.
 and a much more different story than most people perceive.
 -Absolutely. We will definitely mark it on the calendar.
 Thank you very much.