So let’s take a look at the structure ofparadise as it’s presented in Genesis.
So the first aspect of the initial paradaisalstate is un-selfconsciousness.
Now if you look and factor analytic studiesof human personality you note that self-consciousness
although it is arguably our greatest giftalso loads almost entirely on the factor that
defines negative affect.
And you might also notice that when you say,I became self-conscious you generally put
a negative cast on that in that I was talkingbefore a group of people and suddenly I was
seized by self-consciousness.
And as a consequence of that I was floodedby negative emotion and was fundamentally
immobilized.
So it’s a very paradoxical, a very paradoxicalstate of being, our highest rational gift
say, and the only on that clearly distinguishesus from animals is also that which, when manifested,
makes us almost unbearable anxious
The initial paradaisal state when Adam andEve first walked in the Garden of Eden is
characterized by an animal-like unselfconsciousness.
Adam and Eve, whatever they are, are not clearlysegregated from the rest of the world.
They have no idea, for example, of their ownnakedness.
And if you think about what nakedness means,you immediately understand that that’s also
a very profound, dramatic representation.
You know with children around the age of 3or 4, many of them regardless of their mode
of upbringing, start to become very concernedabout privacy, say with regard to bodily functions
and also very concerned about ever showingthemselves without clothing
and it’s perfectly reasonable to presumethat that’s a consequence of their emergent
self-consciousness, an event that takes placesomewhere between the ages of 2 and 5 and
that’s a defining moment that makes themsegregatable, say from their mother.
And so you also have images of Paradise thatflow through Western history that are characterized
by the image of the unconscious union betweenthe mother and child
which is an imagistic representation thateradicates the tension of self-consciousness
both for the mother and for the child.
So the notion that the child is living ina paradaisal condition that is somehow lost
as he or she approaches adulthood gives anothersort of symbolic layer to the notion of the
pre-selfconscious paradise.
It’s also a place where order and chaosare in perfect balance
and you know that because what paradise meansis para – around, daisa – a wall, while
Eden means delight or a place of delight.
Paradaisa, paradise is a walled garden, awalled place of delight
and a garden is precisely that place wherethe forces of nature or chaos and the forces
of culture are held in perfect balance, right?
That’s what a garden is.
It’s nature given form by culture and it’sa place that’s archetypically pleasant a
place where the intervention of human activityhas produced a kind of stability that transcends
that of nature because it’s a cultural constructbut also that transcends that of culture because
all of the plants and the other growing thingsthat constitute a garden are somehow transcendent
even though they’re under the cultivatinghand of culture and the individual.
If you look at the manner in which the fallstory is represented, you can also see that
the place of craziest stability can be regardedas a kind of paradise.
So if you remember the story of Moses leadinghis people through the desert, it’s clearly
the case that when the Israelites were inthe desert, even though they got away from
the tyranny it was easy to look back and saywell you know, tough as it was, the place
that we were before was much better than theplace we are now.
So it’s perfectly reasonable and expectablefor people who are caught in a crisis to look
back to the time prior to the dawn of thatcrisis with longing even if the crisis that
they’re presently experiencing is a necessaryprecondition for further development of personality.
So the story that’s laid out in Genesishas its structure something like this.
Before we became self-conscious the worldwas perfect.
As a consequence of the rise of self-consciousnesswe were thrown out of the Garden of Eden,
out of paradise and destined to live the profaneexistence that characterizes our present mode
of being where we’re subject to knowledgeof mortality and the possibility of Illness
and alienation from God.
And wouldn’t it be ever so great if we couldonly return to that condition of unself-consciousness
and make all our problems go away.
And you see this kind of pathological paradaisalreminiscence manifesting itself in the most
banal forms of conservatism which are alwaysprojecting the ideal – the ideal path somewhere
back into the unattainable reaches of time.
And also in those situations that obtain psychologicallywhen people are absolutely possessed by depression
and anxiety and wish for their consciousnessto come to an end if not metaphorically so
they desire to sleep, then actually so thatsuicide is viewed as a kind of unconsciousness
whose paradaisal nature, the absence of allopposition, is viewed as clearly preferable
to the difficulties of actually maintainingbeing.
Eliade says, the idea of paradise once andthen paradise lost is not something unique
to Western or great Eastern societies.
It’s a widespread motif, just as wide asthe flood motif.
Regardless of where you go in the world youfind this notion.
“When heaven had been abruptly separatedfrom the earth, that is when it had become
remote as in our days, when the tree or vineconnecting earth to heaven had been cut or
the mountain which used to touch the sky hadbeen flattened out then the paradaisal stage
was over and man entered into his presentfallen condition.
In effect all myths of paradise show us primordialman enjoying a beatitude, a spontaneity and
freedom which he has unfortunately lost inconsequence of the fall.
That is of what followed upon a mythical eventthat caused the rupture between heaven and
earth.”
As I said, Eden is delight, a place of delight,by terminological definition whereas paradise
is a walled garden.
I want to show you what knowing that doesfor analysis of the relationship between eastern
and western thought.
So let me tell you quickly the story of theBuddha and I’m going to represent it fundamentally
like this.
Buddha starts his life in what’s essentiallya walled garden by all – by all reasonable
comparative analysis.
And as a consequence of his emergent self-consciousness,the unself-conscious child-like perfection
of that early state is permanently disruptedso you have a situation where the greatest
redemption story of the East follows preciselythe same dramatical tract as the greatest
creation story of the West.
So this is the story.
Buddha’s father is visited by an angel whotells him that his son is going to grow up
to be the greatest temporal profane rulerthe world has ever seen or a great spiritual
leader.
And his father, being a pragmatic and conservativeman, decides that there’s no possible way
I’m going to allow my son to take the ambivalentroad of spiritual enlightenment.
I’m going to allow him to fall completelyin love with the world so that he will remain
attached to this domain.
So prior to Buddha’s birth, his father constructeda great city with walls around it and inside
that city he removes all signs of pain, frustrationand disappointment, any sign of ugliness and
age, the only people who are allowed to existwithin this city, are those who are in perfect
mental and physical health, who are paragonsof beauty and virtue.
And the idea that lurks behind that archetypalstory is that when a father has a child his
moral obligation is to shield the developingconsciousness of that child from contact with
any of the horrors of life that could providethe child with an experience too traumatic
for that developing consciousness to apprehend.
So because it’s an archetypal story it relatesto the development of all people, not just
the redemptive saviour and that’s the motifthat the Buddhist story initially follows.
A good father makes his father fall in lovewith life by enticing that child into a direct
relationship with all that life has to offer.
So Buddha grows up within this walled garden,this unselfconscious paradise.
But precisely because he’s being shieldedto this degree and allowed to mature, his
consciousness continues to expand and theworld outside the boundaries that his parents
have established for him starts to attracthis attention.
Now we know already that the forbidden fruit,right, the lure of what’s outside the walls
is something that human beings just can’tkeep their mangy little paws off, right?
We are absolutely uncontrollably curious andthe best way to make sure that we investigate
something is to lay down a structure thatsays, whatever you do under whatever circumstances
never look there, right?
And then the automatic systems that underlieour orienting and that motivate our seeking
experience are constantly pulling our attentionprecisely to that forbidden spot, compelling
us to investigate exactly that which has beenforbidden.
So because Buddha is a consciousness developingin a healthy manner he immediately becomes
curious about what lies beyond the limitsthat have been established with him and he
makes a decision to go outside of paradise.
right, which seems a particularly ridiculousthing to do, given that in principle he had
everything he could possibly want inside thewalls.
But then again we have the troublesome notionof the original sin of Adam, right, which
is that if any of you were offered a forbiddenfruit again under circumstances mythologically
equivalent to those that obtained in the beginning,you’d immediately reach your hand out and
take it because what we haven’t got forhuman beings is always far more compelling
than what we have gotSo Buddha goes outside the walls.
But his father, who’s a good father althoughsomewhat conservative, decides he’s going
to rig the game a little bit so he gets ridof everybody that’s diseased or unhappy
or uncomfortable or ugly or old or anythingthat could possibly disturb the Buddha.
and he lines the streets with flower wavingwomen and puts petals on the road and sends
his son out in a gilded chariot.
But the gods who are lurking around, right,the trouble making gods who represent chaos
and disorder and the unknown decide to sendin front of Buddha a sick man who hobbles
unsteadily into view.and Buddha asks his retainer precisely what
this phenomena represents and his retainersays, well you know, human beings like you
since you’re human are subject to the deteriorationof these mere physical powers in an arbitrary
way.
And this man is one person who’s been soafflicted.
And so Buddha is completely disenchanted byhis exploratory move out into the terrible
unknown and runs back into the castle wallsand shuts the door and is perfectly happy
to think of nothing for months.
But then as his anxiety habituates and hiscuriosity grows, he can’t stand the notion
of never going outside the walls again andoutside he goes again.
And this time after his father prepares theroute ever so carefully the gods send inside
an old man who hobbles into view.
And Buddha look at him in shock and horrorand says to his retainer, just precisely what’s
going on here?
And his retainer says, well that’s an oldman.
Everybody gets old and you’re going to getold too and that’s the way of all humanity.
And that’s the point at which Buddha’sself-consciousness expands not to only include
the possibility of degeneration but to includethe temporal horizon that’s characteristic
of life.
And he finds that so terribly shocking thathe runs back into the castle and shuts the
walls down and plays with his friends foranother six months until his anxiety, or maybe
a year, until his anxiety finally habituatesand he goes out one final time.
And this time the gods send a funeral paradefor him and he sees his first dead body.
And this such a terrible shock to him thathe can’t even go back to the castle.
So his father prepares for him a great partyin the woods near the castle full of nude
dancing women who are perfectly willing toflaunt themselves and to offer themselves
to him.
But Buddha is so absolutely and catastrophicallyshocked by this notion of emergent death that
he can’t take any pleasure whatsoever inwhat’s being offered to him and he leaves
the kingdom once and for all.
And you think, well that’s exactly whathappens to you when you grow up, right?
If you’re reasonably well socialized andproperly looked after then your curiosity
gets the better of you and you keep goingout into the world until what your parents
have established for you is no longer sufficientfor you.
And as a consequence of that movement outinto the world, you find out all sorts of
things characteristic of your own life thatnot only your parents can’t precisely explain
to you but even the broader formal structuresof your culture have a very difficult time
handling.
And when you finally do encounter such realitiesand allow their effect on you to fully manifest
itself well then you’re finally independentand you no longer can return home.
But from that point forward you’re alsoburdened as Adam is burdened when he loses
his paradaisal unself-consciousness with thefull revelation of what it means to be limited
and alive.
So what happens to Buddha as a consequenceof this revelation?
He becomes an apprentice and the chroniclesof the Buddha’s adventure are careful to
say that he becomes the world’s most proficientpractitioner of Samkhya, which was a philosophical
precursor to yoga and then to yoga.
So he masters all the positions and the asanasuntil he’s disciplined physically to an
almost unlimited degree.
And then he decides that he’ll adopt a stanceof world renunciation which is also something
he’s remarkably good at.
And he starves himself until the chroniclerssay he resembles nothing so much as a pile
of dust.
And then, having exhausted all the disciplinarystructures that his sophisticated culture
has to offer him but still not precisely findingthe answer that he’s looking for, he retreats
into the forest, place of the unknown, andsits himself at the base of a tree.
Underneath the tree he’s visited by visionsand temptations.
The first vision is an essentially eroticone.
Life itself tempts him back out of his self-consciousstate into the domain of pure physical pleasure,
a perfectly reasonable temptation, right,and one that’s powerful enough so that Hindu
philosophers say as their churches and cathedralsare covered with erotic drawings, if you can’t
get past the erotic drawings into the churchthat’s the domain that you should still
inhabit, right.
In the dawning phases of life at least tillmiddle age that’s the appropriate mode of
being to be enticed and seduced by the physicalpleasures that life has to offer.
But in the final analysis those are not sufficientto solve the problem of emergent self-consciousness.
And so the angel of death visits him and offershim the opportunity to exist permanently in
a state of nirvana.
A very, very interesting twist on the storybecause you have to wonder, given the association
say between suicidelity and the notion ofparadise that exists underneath that, if what
Buddha isn’t being offered by the angelof death is in fact death and the cessation
of all the problems of being regardless herejects that, attains enlightenment briefly
and then decides to return to the world toshare what he’s discovered with all of suffering
humanity.
The idea being that the Buddha who is theawakened or enlightened one is capable of
attaining a transcendent state but also knowsfully that because human beings have a shared
social aspect it is not possible for any oneperson to attain redemption until all people
attain redemption, the reason being that it’svery difficult to be transcendent and enlightened
when you see someone who’s sick lying ina ditch.
So then we shift from that back to Genesisand the tempted fall of man and read the third
chapter.
And they were both naked, the man and hiswife and were not ashamed.
Well what does that mean?
Well, Freud pointed out that one of humanbeing’s most common nightmares is to be
stripped of clothing in front of a crowd.
Now why would that be precisely?
Well your naked self is the most vulnerableaspect of you, right?
We’re all clothed and for good reason.
Partly that’s protection from the terriblenatural world, right?
But it also offers us the possibility of placinga barrier between ourselves, our vulnerable
selves and the searching and critical gazeof the community, right?
Because not only are we vulnerable to therigours of nature, we’re also vulnerable
to the depredations and criticisms of society.
And the notion that a man and a woman couldexist naked and not know it is a clear – is
a clear finger pointing in the direction ofa story that says these people were not conscious
or if conscious they certainly were not self-conscious.
And how does the story develop?
"The serpent was more subtle than any beastof the field which the Lord God had made.
And he said unto the woman: yea, hath Godsaid you shall not eat of every tree in the
Garden.
And the woman said unto the serpent, wellwe may eat of the fruit of the trees of the
Garden but of the fruit of the tree whichis in the centre of the Garden God has said
you should not eat of it, neither shall youtouch it lest ye die.
And the serpent said to the woman: you won’tdie for God knows that in the day you eat
thereof then your eyes shall be opened, right,a clear pointing to the notion of an awakening
and an illumination-- And ye shall be likegods knowing good and evil,"
right, which attributes to humanity, a dawningsense of morality explicit morality, the faculty
for comprehension that we do not share withany other animal.
"And when the woman saw that the tree wasgood for food and that it was pleasant to
the eyes and a tree to be desired to makeone wise, she took of the fruit thereof and
did eat and gave also unto her husband withher and he did eat.
"Women, trouble.
What’s the tree?
Well we talked about this a little bit before.
So you say, well if you look at the structureof experience from this particular perspective
and you think about that in a horizontal plane,vertical plane, sorry, with the layers one
on top of another, then you can imagine thetree as the thing that unites these three
layers.
The tree is the domain that unites chaos andorder and the individual, the structure running
up through the middle of it.
And you see a representation of that interestinglyenough, from Norse mythology.
This is the Yggdrasill the axis mundi thetree of the gods, the tree that stands in
the middle of the Norse paradise.
And one of the things that’s very interestingabout this particular tree is that if you
look at its roots the roots are covered withsnakes and serpents and underneath the snakes
and serpents is water.
And so that you see that the tree that standsat the centre of the world is rooted in chaos
fundamentally, is rooted in whatever it isthat constitutes the pre-cosmogonic matrix
of being.
And then the central aspects of this domainare nicely laid out as the domain of territoriality,
the ends of the borders that the individualunderstands and the habitual territory that
he inhabits and then the tree in the centrerepresents whatever it is that’s central
to this – to our mode of being.
And so let’s take a look at that in somedetail and flesh it out symbolically.
We find Eliade is saying the tree that standshypothetically at the centre of the world
is precisely that structure that shamans climbwhen they make their transition from normal
mode of earthly being into their transcendentmode of being.
So Eliade says the symbolism of the ascensioninto heaven by means of a tree is clearly
illustrated by the ceremony of initiationof a Buryat shaman.
The candidate climbs up a post in the middleof his yurt, his tent, reaches the summit
and goes out by the smoke hole.
But we know that this opening made to letout the smoke is likened to the hole made
by the pole star in the bulk of heaven.
So you can imagine there’s a conceptualizationof the world as centred around a particular
axis and that the tent is regarded as, atleast transitorily as a symbolic equivalent
of the cosmological structure.
Among other peoples the tent hole is calledthe pillar of the sky and is compared to the
pole star around which the world rotates,at least from the visual perspective and is
named elsewhere the nail of the sky.
Thus, the ritual post set up in the middleof the yurt is an image of the cosmic tree
which is found at the centre of the worldwith the pole star shining directly above
it.
By ascending it, the candidate enters intoheaven.
That is why as soon as he comes out of thesmoke hole of the tent he gives a loud cry
invoking the help of the gods Up there hefinds himself in their presence.
The tree is an absolutely archaic symbol andit seems to me most likely that it represents
the structure of the nervous system.
I think a structure that’s rooted not somuch in the spinal, sensory motor structures
but deeply in the autonomic structures, stretchingdown into the centre of the body and planting
the mind firmly in its material substrateso that the autonomic system and its projections
up into the amigdylla and limbic system andthen up into the cortex constitute the interface
between the spiritual domain that our psycheinhabits and the material domain that constitutes
our body.
The tree at the centre of our being.
What does the tree do?
Well it bears fruit.
Well what sort of fruit?
Well there are multiple medieval representationsthat are quite peculiar showing Christ, for
example, as the fruit of the tree of the knowledgeof good and evil.
The fruit of the tree of life.
And what does that mean?
It means that conceptualizations like thehero are the products of whatever it is that
this tree represents.
The tree is something that produces fruit.
Fruit is also something that can be ingested.
And as Eric Newman points out wherever liquor,fruit, herbs, etc. appear as the vehicles
of life and immortality, including the waterand bread of life, the sacrament of the host
and every form of food cult down to the presentday we have an ancient mode of human expression
before us.
So imagine the idea of the – of the Piagetianidea of assimilation and then accommodation
and then understand its assimilative, nutritive,underlying metaphorical nature.
The idea being that there’s a tight analogybetween ingesting something material and undergoing
a transformation of energy.
Attendant upon that, right, which is whathappens when you eat and ingesting a piece
of information which offers you a new modeof doing things so you can say well people
will trade work for information.
They will trade food for information.
There must be a kind of equivalence betweenwork and information and food and information
because otherwise the trade wouldn’t makesense.
And then you realize that if you’re informedyou can undertake transformations of yourself
and the material world in a much more efficientmanner because that’s what being informed
means.
And that means that being informed, acquiringsome information and eating something are
all tied up in a complex way into the samemetaphorical structure.
Eat something forbidden, transform as a consequence.
Conscious realization is acted out in theelementary scheme of nutritive assimilation
and a ritual act of concrete eating is thefirst assimilation known to man.
Conscious realization is acted out throughritual by an act of eating.
Since the act of eating represents a veryfamiliar example of assimilation.
The assimilation and ingestion of the content,the eaten food, produces an inner change.
Transformation of the body cell through foodintake is the most elementary of animal changes
experienced by man.
How a weary, enfeebled and famished man canbe turned into an alert, strong and satisfied
being or a man perishing of thirst can berefreshed or even transformed by an intoxicating
drink.
This is and must remain a fundamental experienceso long a man shall exist.
Eric Newman’s point being that our psychologicalexperience of the capacity of psychological
transformation through eating is a metaphorwaiting to be applied to the equivalent experience
that we obtain, the equivalent excitementand sense of transformative possibility that
we acquire as a consequence of coming acrosssome new and truly valuable piece of information.
So you have the idea that the tree that standsat the centre of the world, the individual
mode of being, is something that bears fruit.
And the ingestion of that fruit, that ideasay or that piece of information is something
that can produce a permanent transformation.