Bret 0:06  
One of the things, and you know when you asked me to come on, we decided we would talk a little bit about what to do about Planet Earth, because I've mentioned the first Yes, on your show that was it, and that's Kevin Parker.

Int 0:18  
Well, but my feeling is actually this is about port Parker. And my point is where we are with civilization. We are stuck. And we are on a trajectory that you don't have to be deeply knowledgeable to recognize that it is unstable on enough different fronts that we can't go on like this much longer. We're playing with powerful enough tools that we're in tremendous danger, something going wrong. And so the question is, it's very hard to imagine how you use normal tools. You know, are you going to win an election and get policy through Congress? That's going to change the world and suddenly make a safe it's almost impossible to imagine something like that happening. And so the question is, is there a park or kind of innovation something that is not obvious to us that's it's there, the city was always there. People were not always doing park or with the objects in it, but they could have been. And so are we missing the obvious? Is it in front of us what we're supposed to do to take a civilization, that's hurdling out of control with too many people consuming too fast? And using mechanisms that are dangerous? Is there a route to put us back on track to something reasonable, that looks like one of these innovations that you don't know it existed until somebody shows you that it's there? I before I go deeply into this question, I should probably say something a little bit self protective, which is talking about the question of what to do with planet Earth can be, it can be an idle discussion, in which case, there's no there's nothing to be navigated. But if you want to do it seriously, there's a danger of triggering a kind of reflexive penalty that we all carry around. 
So arrogance is something that we don't like, people don't like to hear people being arrogant. And so we all have like a detector for that, that we we listen. And when somebody strays into arrogance, maybe it goes off, in order to have a conversation about what to do about planet Earth. Obviously, we're talking about very serious stuff and for anybody to contemplate that they might know or might be tuned into a conversation that could find its way to some new answer. We are in danger of triggering that, oh my god, that's arrogant circuit. And so at some level, in order to have this conversation properly, I need to I need to turn off my own set. sensitivity to hearing that little warning bell in my own head. And you know if, if the conversation is preposterous, fine. That's that's something a reasonable person could conclude about anybody who was talking about changing the way the world functions, maybe it is preposterous, and I leave that possibility open. On the other hand, you know, I have kids, I'm pretty sure I can do the math myself on how much danger we're in. I may not know the full extent of it, but I can tell that we're in enough danger, that we have to do something counterintuitive and different enough that it stands a chance of changing the way the place functions, or my kids and your kids are in serious trouble. So anyway, that's why I would would go down this road. But I have to do it in that kind of context where I'm not too worried about whether people hear this as you know, maybe I'm fooling myself or something like that. That makes sense. Yes. Why? Why would I get it? See I lack those self protective instincts I just spout off. All right.

Bret 4:06  
Fair enough. But go ahead.

Int 4:08  
Okay. So there are a lot of so I should say, Where does this all come from? My initial foray into this style of thinking actually starts with Eric, who you had on your podcast. I saw a lot of feedback about him on your podcast was great. People were really jazzed about brilliant bro. Yeah, brilliant brother.

Bret 4:30  
I have all noticed that he is absolutely amazing. And there's no place to hide from him because he is so good across, you know, all levels of analysis. So you know, he obviously even on your podcast, he was playing around in biology space, very adept play. I can't do that. I can't go over into math space and do the same favor for him. But But anyway, yeah, he's a he's a very interesting thinker and across many more levels than I think Anybody else I've encountered. But anyway, he some years ago after the financial collapse of 2008, decided that there needed to be a proactive discussion about what had gone wrong and economic space that had allowed that catastrophe to happen. And so he and some collaborators put together a conference called the economic Manhattan Project. It was at the perimeter Institute in, in Canada. And so I went I attended this conference. And it was, it was the first place I encountered an intentional conversation about changing a large enough piece of the puzzle to actually fix the way the world works to prevent another financial collapse like the one that happened in in 2008. And I also met people at that conference who have continued on in these conversations. I Joined occupy, I mean, not that there was anything really to join, but I participated in it, in hopes that it would turn into something capable of changing the way we function, then I ended up being very disappointed and frustrated by the quality of the conversation inside of of Occupy Wall Street. 
But anyway, it revealed some things to me. And then after that, there was a group of people who gathered in something that ultimately was called game B. And game B is really where the thinking that I want to talk to you about emerged most clearly, game be no longer exists, but a group of us from across the political spectrum, various different kinds of expertise. We had tech people, we had professors from various different disciplines. We had a Buddhist I mean, we really had a lot of different people who were united basically by an understanding the That, that that each arrived at that the trajectory we were on was so dangerous that it required us to take action. And we've tried out various different ideas about what might, what might be sufficient to, to avert the danger we were heading towards and give humanity more time to find a way to exist on the planet. So, I should probably say something about what game being means. And it carries a relevance into into what we might do in the present. Game be was basically proceeded from the idea that what we live in is a game theoretical landscape, right? That the winners in this game theoretic landscape are individuals who have figured out where there is a niche, some of them have figured out how to engage in something called rent seeking, which rent seeking basically means making money without producing some without producing value. So there's a lot of stuff that could On an economy that is not productive and good, but nonetheless generates fortunes. So that's rent seeking as opposed to innovation or productivity.

Int 8:08  
You're talking about like hedge fund type stuff, moving money around?

Bret 8:12  
Well, I want to be a little careful about this because it is quite possible for things like hedge funds to actually correct inefficiencies in the economy in a way that is productive. That doesn't mean that that's the average thing. That's what things are you referring to? Well, I mean, you know, let's let's take the, the ultimate example that will make it clear a warlord is not responsible for, for building the road that they then stand by the side of and extort money from people who want to travel it. A cable company may produce some benefit. They obviously have infrastructure that allows you to get content, but what fraction of what you're paying for is actually about them delivering a service at some price and making some reason profit, and what fraction of it is about the fact that they are an economic Goliath, and that you don't have enough choice to be able to negotiate a decent price with them. So there's some fraction of what they're producing that is productive. But then there's a large amount of profit there that isn't about productivity or innovation. It's about the fact that they own a choke point and you can't get around it. So we don't know what fraction of the economy is rent seeking and what fraction of it is productive. But there is, especially if one is broad minded about thinking about all the ways that one can engage in rent seeking, one can actually be destructive of value. If you destroy future well being for our descendants. It may look productive in the present, but it isn't productive. It's actually destructive. 
So that's a kind of rent seeking that we don't even typically model but where are we headed? So Oh, yes. So we live in a game theoretic landscape that's both good and bad. as you point out, competition is a healthy thing. And competition in markets produces a huge amount of value. So I hear people deriding capitalism, and I always want to make the same point to them, which is you've got two things glued together, and you are challenging them as a package, but there's no reason they have to be packaged. So we would be foolish to give up markets. Markets are amazingly powerful engines of innovation, they are capable of solving problems that we cannot solve deliberately, even if we want it to. So we need markets. But we don't want markets, ruling the planet and deciding that anything that spits out a profit is therefore good, and that we should be exposed to whatever the market discovers can be viable. So what we want is ultimately to create divide in, provide incentive structures that cause the market to produce things that are good for us. 
Right? In other words, if you tell the market that you want the solution to some problem, the market can figure out how to solve that problem, and it will do it very well. But if you allow the market to decide what problems to solve, it may end up for example, addicting you to your phone, right addicting to you to your phone in a way that harms your social relationships harms your your parenting of your children, harms all kinds of things that are really important breaks the ability of your children to have a educational experience in school. We don't want the market discovering how to disrupt useful functioning of people. We want the market to stay out of that stuff and then to provide us benefits that only it can provide like all of the mechanisms that now allow us to navigate seamlessly in places that we've never been avoiding traffic that we wouldn't know to work. About right those are huge benefits and they're capable of taking a city that is to snarled with traffic and reducing the degree to which it is snarled with traffic. So they're very powerful. But we shouldn't, we shouldn't throw the baby out with the bathwater. Markets are good, allowing markets to discover any and every mechanism for exploiting you is not good at all. And in fact, it's a large part of why we're in the predicament that we're in is that we let the market decide what problems to solve and then if it solves them, and they're very lucrative, there's no way to say no, gay is what we live right is a market in which we decide how to behave and if we have insight maybe we come out ahead if we don't have correct insight maybe we lose but anyway that's that's gay it's it's it's the market as we find it. Game be was the idea that that there are ways that you could restructure the deal we have with each other so that you could compete in game as terms without losing the game. 
So the conclusion and you know, again, game B is not a live organization anymore. But it was a place in which a lot of work was done that I think feeds into the conversation about what we do very clearly, in order to change the way the world functions. Most of the mechanisms that have functioned in the past are no longer viable. It is almost inconceivable to imagine that you could have a revolution in any standard sense that would successfully capture power and then wield it wisely. I can't even imagine that happening. So game B is the idea that one needs to create an entity that is capable of competing in the market is capable of competing in game a terms and winning against game a. Game A is the way things run. Game B is an alternative that can compete in game as terms and win. And that sounds first time you hear it. It sounds preposterous because the system has so much inertia in it, that you would think it is completely impervious to any challenge. But there's a hidden factor, which I think is evident in those various examples here we're looking at in park core and Lars Anderson, and his archery innovations, and Danny MacAskill. I would also say Jane Goodall and her success at sorting out what was going on with chimps. The point is systems that become very difficult to dislodge, that have great inertia are almost inevitably feeble in a particular fashion. So this is true of academic disciplines to If a discipline becomes stuck, it is very hard to get a hearing within the discipline, but the discipline loses track of where it has made assumptions that aren't true or aren't certain. 
And so it becomes relatively easy to compete against it if you're not requiring it to validate your perspective, so, that feebleness is a feature of our system. Our system is delivering the goods to people at a low rate. Most people are dissatisfied, they're unhealthy, they are not well protected from things like bad luck. And those are all problems that can be solved by a an entity that is capable of restructuring the deals between people. In other words, let's take an obvious one, like insurance. Insurance is not working delivered by a market, there's a very good reason it isn't, which is that the the strategy for winning in the delivery of insurance is perfectly obvious. You want to ensure people who need it very little, and you want to uninsured people who needed a lot. That's how you win at the insurance game. So the insurance industry is always looking to make that deal with the world that's always looking to figure out how to, to, to dis ensure those who are most likely to need it. And what that means is that we can't provide a risk pool. A risk pool just means you don't know if you're going to get a brain tumor, I'm going to get a brain tumor. So how about we both agree to pay for whoever's treatment needs it, and whoever has the bad luck wins in that deal, and whoever has the good luck loses, but because we don't know who it is ahead of time. It's a win for both of us, right? So that structure is one that you can build inside of this competitive architecture. And what I'm what I'm getting at is that The conversation of people that has coalesced people who are discussing the question of how to make things function in a way that solves the problems that we all face without having to win some unimaginable electoral victory, or to challenge these governments outright. 
That conversation centers around a game theoretic insight. And this is something I mentioned before that I had participated in occupy and had been quite disappointed. And really where I was before I ran into this conversation was I was, if I'm honest with myself, I was becoming a little desperate because I could see how much trouble we were in. But every mechanism that you might use to fix it seemed very unlikely to function. When I heard a presentation that said, Actually there's a mechanism that does not go through any of the familiar historical means, but uses tools that we all see deployed, right? The same tools that cause Facebook to be successful can be used to repair the system. That begins to sound plausible to me. That make any sense, sort of but this is we're on a long road. Yeah. Is there a way to boil this down?

Int 18:28  
Well, let's try an example. Okay, um, how do you feel about Bitcoin?

Bret 18:32  
I think it's fascinating. you wish you had more of it? Well, now I have some of it, but it's not mine. It's all donated towards fight for the Forgotten they're building wells in the Congo. I really, I really liked the idea behind it. To me. I like things that don't have a whole lot of rules, where people sort of figure out what's right, good. So if we take Bitcoin as an example Something that addresses the problems of fiat currency, like the dollar. Nobody asked permission to build it. In fact, we don't even know who innovated. It's a pseudonym that we have, we don't know whose identity it is recently, someone thought it was Elon Musk, which I would not be surprised that crazy guy.
You know, I couldn't say and I think it doesn't much matter, right? What we know is that somebody without asking permission, found a better model for a currency that addressed issues that we all face and we're not individually capable of addressing ourselves. And it's pretty clear that a something in this realm is going to win and it's going to become an important player if not the important player on the world stage currency wise, that is a an entity which exists in game a space right you can convert Bitcoin $2 that's not hard. Bitcoin functions. inside of this realm, it's not illegal. It works. It's reliable. The problems have been solved by people because solving those problems made sense it it enriched them for doing so they made their currency more functional. So that entity is a solution that is superior to game a. But it functions in game eight terms. It's winning in game eight terms at the moment, I'm not saying it isn't going to crash, it probably is going to crash. Because it's probably overinflated at the moment. How much will it crash? Will it come back? Are we going to go through repeated bubbles and Bitcoin will still went out? I don't nobody, clearly nobody knows. But the idea that it is a superior solution invented inside this other system that is winning against the dollar at the moment. That's a fine example. Likewise, you could use Wikipedia as a fine example. This is an entity city that is functioning inside it is competing with the old encyclopedias that is competing with for profit services that would deliver information. And, frankly, it's winning because it's superior. It's perfect now, but, but it's a it's a demonstration that you can do things inside this space that, in fact, have reorganized our relationship to information. And in fact, in a way that we don't typically acknowledge, is challenging the the Academy. I mean, maybe part of why the Academy was so feeble at the point that this social justice madness started to challenge it had to do with the fact that without the Academy's permission, information became free. The fact that everybody it was a level playing field for information meant that the academy needed to figure out what it was going to deliver on top of that information, and it didn't figure it out. And I would say there was an obvious answer, which it missed. It needed to deliver stuff that didn't scale. needed to teach insight and critical thinking and how to wield that information properly rather than continuing to deliver textbook level information when effectively textbooks are obsolete. But these are these are examples of successful, competitively successful, innovative challenges to the model that pre existed them. Okay. And the question is, can that set of models be systematized so that it without having to do the impossible simply replaces the system as it stands because it delivers the things that the system claims to deliver more successfully than the system delivers?

Int 22:42  
Okay, like what things we're talking about?

Bret 22:45  
We're talking about installation from bad luck. Luck is a tremendously negative influence. So like insurance, ensuring that we collectively utilize correct Something that we collectively utilize. So imagine that you could have wonderful insurance, but that in signing up for that insurance, you were agreeing to some sort of larger social entity. So like your taxes would go towards life insurance, but meaning, like, things that go wrong in life, like some part of what you would spend on things would be attributed to this fund.
Yeah. And it's, I think, we unfortunately, default to thinking of everything in monetary terms. You could also invest in such an entity, let you know, let's talk about the question of teachers that you were pointing, okay. Why are good teachers so few and far between? Well, of course, we pay at a level that we get exactly what we ordered. And you know, the few good teachers that we run into are by and large people who are doing it in spite of the fact that they're being economically penalized for doing it. But what if your your Insurance, your access to excellent insurance that correctly hedged out the danger of bad medical bad luck came with some sort of social obligation in which, you know, I don't know, the three years after you had gone to graduate school and gotten your advanced degree in something you spent teaching in some school that needed that. So you didn't sideline yourself from the economy for the rest of your life teaching in some school where you were forever going to be hobbled by bad administrators, but you decided to take some period of time and invested in your community or somebody else's community using expertise that that you got that you'll be highly paid for later.
So it's almost like you know, mandatory military service manager mandatory military service is yes, it is one version of a much larger space of potential agreements that you could sign up for an exchange for benefits that you can't most of us cannot negotiate on the open market.

Int 25:02  
So, to get your education, you would agree to use that education for the good community for a certain amount of time?

Bret 25:11  
Absolutely. So instead of walking away with massive debt that is going to hobble you in economic terms as you're trying to, to find your niche that you would sign up for some agreement that was, you know, but wouldn't that still benefit the elite? Because what if Scrooge McDuck has a kid and Scrooge McDuck kid, he pays for his kids education, listen, son, you're not going to do any service. What you're going to do is use those three years to get ahead. And those little fox when they get out of that service, they're gonna be working for you. Haha, they throw the gold coins up in the air, right? So this is another place.

Int 25:50  
Nice luck.

Bret 25:53  
This is another place where two things are fused together that we need to tease apart okay. Trying to remember, I think Eric may have actually said this on your podcast. If he didn't, he said it elsewhere. But elites is not a good category. Right? leets takes two things that don't belong together and it decides that they are one. And so the Scrooge McDuck thing becomes get blocks the other thing, we want people to innovate, right? And one of the reasons that equality of outcome is absolutely not desirable, even if you could arrange it is that the inequality of outcome is the incentive that drives people to achieve amazing stuff that we want them to achieve. Right, right course. So how far ahead of everybody else should you end up? Well, this is a difficult problem because you to the extent that somebody earns a fortune, because they've they have innovated in a in an important way but then they have gone on to be a rent seeker. We don't want them or rewarded for their rent seeking, but we do want them rewarded for their innovation. So they're the problem is the elite is two different things. And even worse, individuals who are members of the elite are composites of both things where you get into the elite, because you innovated something amazing. But the degree to which you have been rewarded is, I don't know 60-70% the result of rent seeking rather than what you innovate it again, for people just tuning into us now rent seeking meaning, doing things to it to extract money from this system without any real benefit to the people that are around you. 
Yeah, it's anytime that you get paid without producing something of value, either innovation or productivity itself or something like that. But how would you regulate that? How would you How would you figure out a way to regulate the amount of profit that someone could like, if you have a system right and if you build something and then you get you know, Some sort of a residual benefit from that system because you built it. And so you're not really doing anything but you're just constantly collecting money from this thing. How would you stop that or regulate that? It's a very tough conversation because one has to be very careful that you don't remove an incentive to do something valuable even though the value of it may be very subtle. So okay, the example of you know, investment, like playing the stock market might look unproductive. But to the extent that you are correcting the fact that certain things are undervalued, and other things are overvalued, you are actually doing a kind of service that is not as obvious on the outside unless you've spent time thinking about the logic of why you want the market to be efficient. So I don't want to, I don't want to declare that certain things are in and of themselves bad because we can't see the obvious value of them. On the other hand, there's an awful lot of stuff that is either totally valueless for which people are very handsomely paid or worse, counterproductive destructive of value, right? 
If you take waste, and you get paid to dispose of it and you dispose of it in a way that it creates cancers, where you can't detect that they've been created by what you've done, but it's not that you solved the problem of that waste, you just caused cancers in random homes that won't be able to trace their their misfortune to your action. That's not not only is that unproductive, but it's counterproductive. It's harmful. So how do you address these questions? Well, a you this is a much harder problem. If you imagine that what you want to do is fix the landscape that you're walking into and say you're a rent seeker and you're productive and you're 30% productive, but 70% around secret. Nobody believes you can do that. What you can do is restructure things so that going forward, what is rewarded is actual productivity. That is not harmful or actual innovation that is not harmful. And what is panelized? And what you really want if you if the system is to function, what you want is a disincentive to do anything that hurts other people that has a net negative impact. 
Sure, on the system, one of the biggest obstacles to fixing the world is that although a huge fraction of the population is actually aware that things are off, and they would like it to be better, there's so much low level stuff that keeps us trapped in these unproductive kinds of cycles. And one of the things that I keep running into now, I'm now being including all these conversations with folks who do aspire to something better, but everybody, and I mean really just about everybody has stuff that to them is sacred and they want to take it off the table, right? They they're very Interested in the conversation about how we might fix the world. 
But you know, if they're a libertarian, the point is, as soon as you you can't even finish the word regulate, right? And they're just like, Oh, well, sorry, you know, who watches the watchers? And the point, the it's, it's a bitter pill for just about everybody who's got some sacred thing that they're holding on to is you are if we deploy something that functions well and is capable of replacing the system we have without some gigantic catastrophe necessary in order to get over the transition. The whole point is to everyone's net benefit. Right? If liberty is your thing, and I'm virtually sure liberty is your thing as it is my thing, yes, that you will get more Liberty net liberty will go up in a system that functions well. Many of the things that are causes us not to be free, have nothing to do with governmental regulation they have to do with expectations that have been created by a market that does not have our interests at heart. And so if you're tracking net liberty, then a system that functions well liberate, it may have more regulation in it than the one we currently have. But that regulation is liberating rather than oppressive. And so anyway, with with libertarians, getting them to imagine, to wrap their minds around the possibility of regulation that they wouldn't hate, they're there. 
So we are all so experienced now. living in a world of malignant government, right, where government, government action almost can't be useful. And so it is natural to rebel against it and say, I don't want any more of that the less the better, because the actions tend to be predatory. But that is not the inherent nature of regulation and so can Constructing a set of incentives that cause the market to deliver you the good parts of what a phone does without secretly addicting you to something that, you know, we now know. I mean, I don't know how many people in Silicon Valley have now issued a note of caution. But there's no switch to flip phones themselves. They have I mean, this is, this is nature's way of telling you that these algorithms have escaped our control. The fact that the people who are in a position to make a phone call and know more or less what the algorithm does, can't even protect themselves ought to that ought to set off warning bells for us. Right, those people are in the best position to protect themselves and the fact that they are bending over backwards there. They are externalizing decision making power, they're having their secretaries tell them when they can interact with certain sites in order to keep them from getting into habits that they can't manage. This is this is the only warning we're going to get this wasn't bad. We would still do something about it. But this is only getting more sophisticated. And so if we do want to restructure things and I would argue that even though market fundamentalists will, you know, hear their little sacred, sacred thing being challenged, what we really want to do is free markets to do what the brochure says that they do, while eliminating what the brochure never mentions, the brochure doesn't mention the fact that a totally free market produces predators and parasites at a huge rate. Right? 
It doesn't have to we can, we can structure things such that a predator is not viable. So that it a predator has nothing to eat. And if the predator has nothing to eat, the habitat won't have them. Right. So that is the the perspective that all of us if I would do that, let's see this is these are abstract ideas, right? How would we how would we eliminate predators? How would we eliminate predators You would eliminate predators by dis incentive. So your question actually has a hidden assumption built into it. You've seen the market as a mature entity with lots of full grown predators. But just as it is with biology, all of those predators started with something simple. And what happened was, they tapped into a niche. And because that niche was allowed to exist, the predators grow and they get more and more sophisticated at doing what they are doing. If you don't want to see the predators, you eliminate the niche for predation.

Int 35:43  
This sounds like it would be functional with if there was like 100 people.

Bret 35:46  
Well, first of all, this is one of the primary questions in the various conversations where people are trying to figure out how to bootstrap such a thing is that we have what's called Dunbar's number, right and numbers, numbers, basically limit in the low hundreds of how many people you can keep in your head. Right. And so the point is we are we are adapted to that. And that number is probably an indicator of something like the number of people that you can adaptively interact with. Yeah, I mean, in other words, if you had, I mean, this is really the motivation for your question. If you had 150 people, and somebody was a bad actor, their reputation would precede them and you would you would detect, I should be careful interacting with that person so that the structure would be set up for tribes, which is essentially how we evolved, right? I mean, that's what Dunbar's number essentially reveals is that we evolved growing up in groups of, you know, 50 to a couple hundred people, and those are the amount of people that you can keep in your mind, right. So harddrive space, essentially, we do but we also, human beings are very good at taking a technological solution and cluding or hacking A remedy for a problem like that. 
So for example, you on board in your mind have the ability to track something like 150 individuals with respect to their reputation, so that you know how much to trust in any given interaction in a group of, you know, 1500 you don't on the other hand, reputation can accumulate in some way that you can check it through people who you know, right. So, people whose reputations are directly known to you are capable of giving you a reference and in fact, you you know that this works because interpersonally if somebody you trusted, to a great extent, gave you a recommendation of somebody else you would you wouldn't know how to evaluate it. So, we are, unfortunately for both better and worse, we are living in a technological landscape that doesn't look like anything that our ancestors faced. That provides mechanisms for building solutions to problems that in an ancestral environment would not have been possible. And this is not new. I mean, the Library of Alexandria is a technological solution to the problem of information having expanded to a level that a human mind couldn't hold it, and ironically burned down by ideologues. 
Well, sure. I mean, that's, you know, yeah. So yeah, you have to build a structure that is robust to challenge and right of all of the things that would have to be true for a replacement system for for planet Earth. The, the key is understanding that there are certain values that all reasonable people agree on. In fact, you can use to diagnose who's reasonable. So assuming that we don't all start at the same starting point, right, whether it's from our cognitive ability or education or opportunities, how would you stop predators? How would you stop people from preying on the weak How would you stop like because they are oppressive. editors who they themselves are unfortunate mentally, they themselves have a deficit of thinking, and we're dealing with such numbers. When we're dealing with 300. And whatever million people we have in this country alone, yeah, there's plenty of dummies that you could pray on.
Well, the first thing that you would want to do is you would want to build. So if you came to me, and you said, I have a social network, and it provides 85% of the functionality of Facebook, but it insulates you completely from dopamine traps being used to it right dict You okay? I'd sign up in a sec.

Int 39:39  
Okay. Right. Right. But you are an intellectual and you are rare in that regard, that you're worried about this, these people that are in Silicon Valley, that are talking about the dangers of the things they've created themselves. They're rare, most people like look at all the likes, right?

Bret 39:55  
Sure. He's like, well, but okay, so there's something that bored at work. Right and one check their likes. Yes, but I mean likes why but that's what a lot of it You must have a nice but my butt's on bad. Okay. But the first of all things spread in waves. Yeah. And, you know, it is possible to just look at the landscape and say, Well, yeah, only intellectuals are gonna get why they should want such a thing. But it's really it's not accurate. I mean, for one thing the world is talking about blockchain currency.
The world is not talking about blockchain currency, a very small percentage of the world is talking about blockchain currency, the same amount that are talking about the earth being flat. 
Hmm, I don't think that's right. But it is. But I would say I grant your point. It's not a huge percentage of people who are talking about blockchain currency but it's enough that on the network news, people are talking about blockchain is it a bubble? So it is beginning to penetrate the the the public consciousness and it is penetrating it because people have to navigate lives in which economic fluctuation jeopardizes them. And so there's an incentive if there's something over there, blockchain is not. It's not a joke anymore. Well, I don't want to say it. There is no game be at the moment. But there is a conversation that emerged from this basic point is that one constructure a superior deal to what people are able to work out for themselves, and it can function inside of the system and it can gain adherence for the very same reason that people are buying Bitcoin for the same reason that people have decided to get smartphones for the same reason people have signed up for Facebook, those are with the exception of Bitcoin. Those are gay examples, and they are predatory. But you could provide a version that was not predatory that would function in a superior way with respect to how how it enhanced your ability to function in the world and rational people. 
I mean, you know, you make a good point. It's not that we have billions of people who are sophisticated enough to know that they should be looking for that alternative and who will jump on it. But to the extent that you have people that are sophisticated, are aware that their lives are being disrupted by forces that they are incapable of managing, like these dopa mean, traps and the like, who will embrace these technologies because they themselves are looking for a mechanism to insulate from the predatory things that have emerged in the market. what you will get is the spread of these technologies. And if there's one sort of key message here about all of the objections that one might raise about the difficulty of creating such alternatives and getting them to be adopted, the number of things that we have already adopted because we got something for it. Cell Phone being the perfect example. We didn't have to tell people to get a cell phone, people got a cell phone because all the things that they could see that it did for them. And that same drive to pick up some new technology or agreement because it enhances your life, it solves some problem for you in some way that's good, that causes the thing to be adopted out of self interest. And that that is what the mechanism for change is going to have to look like is self interest causing people to embrace a shift in the the opportunities and obligations that they're signed up for.
Now, I think one of the problems that I have with this is that I always assume that this is going to be like on January The first was switching over to the new system, but it's not right can't be can't can't be I mean how to be a it's got to be almost like a natural chain of events or it has to be like water flowing downhill. 
That so I can speak scientifically about my own field because, you know, I did enough training that I, I know where the bodies are buried. When you're in a field, and that field is stuck, it is impossible to move the field. You can't get a hearing that will allow you to change the way the field thinks. But you can step outside the field, you can leave the reservation as it were, and you can proceed by other means. And what what happens is the same thing that you know, Lars Anderson discovered with archery is that once you're no longer signed up for what good form looks like, there are all kinds of ways to accomplish things that are not documented. And so finding those alternatives, game a is not serving people's needs. We are all unhealthy. You know, even if we find a way to be physically healthy, we are We're all overwhelmed by so much social noise, and so much choice that is meaningless, that we end up wasting a huge fraction of our time spending a tremendous amount of our mental effort on puzzles that aren't interesting or worthwhile or productive. And so we are all, each of us has a giant opportunity to upgrade our lives by simply removing a bunch of the noise by getting the systems that are supposed to function in our interest to do so more effectively. 
And therefore we are, I hate to use the word consumers, but we would be willing consumers for a better alternative work to show up for us and presenting that alternative so that people find it, they experiment with it, and upon discovering that actually, you know what, I am better off when I participate in this way then that way that that causes adoption, and it doesn't take very much, you know, Bitcoin obviously started with you know, an ambitious person who set the thing in motion. What's a currency with only one person using it? Right, right. But now it's not a currency with one person using it. It's a currency. You've used it, I've used it. So anyway, it is possible to get adoption based on the fact that the thing solves problems that people are otherwise stuck with.

Int 46:18  
Do you think that because things are moving so quickly today, it seems to me that like new ideas are implemented so fast, new concepts are accepted so quickly, that something like this where it might have taken several decades, a few decades ago, would only take a few years to that?

Bret 46:36  
Well, the there's become a thing, there are two things. One, there is the possibility that things will change very rapidly. And then there's the fact that they must, because the trajectory we're on, we are playing with such powerful technologies and being operated at such a high rate with such high throughput that those of us who have started. You know, I think it's a mistake to look at the problems of the world as individual problems, it's much more effective to look at them as symptoms of problems that don't have names. So we have an economic system that generates technologies that create great benefits in the short term at some massive cost in the long term. And we have no mechanism once they've generated massive profits, there's no ability to shut them off, right? That's a problem that has many, many symptoms that we could name but that we, we, in effect, don't have much time that the rate at which we are liquidating the well being of the planet at present is so fast that effectively we need, we need to change quickly and it doesn't mean I guess that's the other thing that I haven't said yet is nobody including me thinks that we're going to be able to spell out an answer in the present. That is correct. 
But what we can do is navigate in the direction of the answer that is correct. And we can discover what that answer looks like. In other words, the right model is not the writing down of the new rules of the world and the embrace of them because you get benefits. It is prototyping what the new structure would be. And then you Institute the prototype in some group of people who have signed up for it. And then you discover what you didn't know about it, that you needed to know. And you correct those problems so that what you get is effectively evolution, building an elegant solution rather than what progressives often accidentally invite, which is good intentions that produce horrifying outcomes because you didn't know what they were actually going to do once you set them in motion. Right communism being a great example. You think communism is going to solve the problems of the world. In fact, it creates, you know, Massive harm and kills millions because you didn't understand what it would do in motion. So we don't want to ever face that. Again, we don't want to be utopians. Because anytime you engage in utopianism, if you set it in motion, you're going to create a dystopia, it's virtually guaranteed. The way to avoid that is not to imagine that you know, the answer gets to define what objective you want the system to reach, and then navigate towards it.

Int 49:33  
How do you think this could be implemented?

Bret 49:35  
Well, it requires capital frankly, and it requires capital and people who understand what the problems are. Most importantly, it requires people who understand game theory, because what we keep doing is setting systems in motion that have the characteristics that guarantee Evolution, there are only four of them. And if you set a system in motion that has those four characteristics, you will get adaptive evolution and what it will produce, you have no control over it will produce whatever the niche space allows. So you need people who are aware of the game theoretic parameters of the space and who understand. Essentially, the, you know, Game Theory is a very important topic. It's less complicated than people think there aren't as many games as you would imagine. There are a few canonical ones. And then there are a bunch of variations on a theme, but understanding those things so that you can use so you can effectively harness the power of evolution to build a functional system, rather than build a system and then suffer the consequences of evolution that you didn't anticipate. That's what we keep doing. We built an economy and a political system that evolved out from under us and they create monstrous phenomena that we didn't anticipate because they weren't in the plan. We are just on the cusp of understanding enough about what a human being is and how it functions for us to actually take control of our structure and to turn it to our to basically creating a stable, non utopian, abundant system. 
In other words, the stuff that we are all pursuing. Right? You got your first smartphone, and it changed everything and it was marvelous. And then your second one didn't change that much. And your third one was no big deal on your fourth one is barely a blip, right? That thing that we are pursuing the well being that we felt the burst of when we got our first, our first smartphones, that thing can be made to the system can be made such that we are constantly getting the signals of well being and the liberty to do things that are upcoming consequence. In other words, it is not beyond our current understanding, to build a system, that instead of getting you to innovate something having a huge burst of dopamine and then it wears out and you're constantly looking for the next one, it is possible to build a system that is structured such that your intuitive interaction with it is healthy. So that you are feeling about that is something I want to engage with that is something I don't feel like engaging with actually leads you correctly through it and that would free your mind to think about interesting things rather than thinking about, you know, which news magazine is the least fake.
Right. So architecting a system that is that understands what a human being is that understands we are not built to be happy and therefore, pursuing happiness as if we were built to be happy. Happy is a hazard, we should be pursuing something else. And we should recognize that happiness is a carrot on a stick that evolution built into us in order to get us to pursue objectives which were not stable well being they were actually the spread of our genomes, which you can attach to technology, this pursuit of happiness is the pursuit of until your material possessions. And we facilitate that with these advertisements that make every new thing look like this is the one that's going to take me over the top, I'm going to finally reach the promised land.
Well, technology is one thing really we are built to pursue something that economists called growth. But I would say human beings, like all creatures are built to detect opportunities that they can capitalize on. And those opportunities can look like various different things. It can look like a bunch of, you know, for some creature foraging, it can be some food that it happens on to four a population of humans that can be a new continent. That's a huge opportunity. for human beings. It can also be a new technology that takes whatever opportunity you have and make it allows you to do more with it. But we are wired to search for those things. And the pursuit of those things has produced a great many marvelous innovations and discoveries. But the fact that we do not understand that we are mindlessly pursuing these things, even when they are not available, causes us to do all sorts of harm to ourselves. So understanding these things, as we finally are beginning to we could build a civilization that did not leave us on the hedonic treadmill pursuing happiness which cannot possibly be reached, but would allow us to be fulfilled and to to utilize the amazing brain capacity that evolution has given us for something that's actually worthy of it.

Int 54:56  
Brett Weinstein, on that note, let's wrap this bitch up. All right. Thank you, sir. I really appreciate it. So much. Sorry. I hope I hope someone can actually do this. I hope it can be done. Awesome. Thank you. Thank you very much. All right, thanks. Brett Weinstein on Twitter and you don't have those other things. Don't use those other terrible technologies now, right?