This is a question that really touchesme personally
because as I become more involved inveganism and become more interested in
animal rights,
it's really been difficult for me toretain the same amount of compassion for other
humans, especially other humans that are hurting animals, as I fo for
other animals so what is the best way toretain compassion for non-vegans
while still promoting veganism?
My diet is what you would call vegan,
but I don't really say
often anymore, "I am a vegan" I'll say
that I don't eat animal products butidentifying
with any kind of label that excludesothers ends up being the basis for
limiting where our compassion extends and then the basis for conflict.
And so we want to not just be
Americans or you know,
Christians or whatever limited group.We want to be citizens of the planet. And we
want to be not just human
citizens but earthlings, we want tocontinue to expand our sense of
connectedness to the rest of life
and so I think there's even an identitylevel of I am
a vegan or an animal activist as opposed to just, compassion is a deep value for
me.
Everybody actually values compassioneven if their circle hasn't extended as
far yet. They value it towards their kids,towards
their pets usually, towards somethings. And then we identify again what's
the same between us not what's differentand then we get to have a basis for
building from there
because with the exception of a fewpeople that were raised by very
conscious parents in this way,
most about us ate meat while experiencing ourself as ethical, caring, loving people.
I did, right, and so the me today couldeasily be judging the previous me as uncaring
and I wasn't uncaring, I was unaware.
And awareness requires more than justhearing,
"Oh, animals suffer somewhere,  it requires
actually getting it to change a lifelongpattern that our whole family has done, our
whole culture has done,
almost everybody around us has donesince we were a baby. And so we're
looking at changing something profound, we're looking at changing
how someone supports their own life,staying alive at like a multiple times
a day basis,
which is why the act to of becoming vegetarian is such a huge one,
because when you say, "Hey the way that I support my staying alive and something
that I do every day, multiple times andsomething I've done since
since I was an infant, I'm gonna change that",  it's a huge chance.
And if you're changing it not just foryou, if you change for health reasons
it's different
because they you learn another health fad and it just keeps changing but if you change
a core way of how you support your life, that started
early on and everyone around you isstill doing the other thing,
for the  purpose of compassion,
then you're saying that compassion isactually one of my core values and I'm
actually going to guide
the core aspects of my life by thatvalue and that ends up
bleeding over into so many other areas.You start recognizing, oh my purchases
affect things in ways I they don't see. If I had to go to the factory farm to buy meat,
I would never get the meat but because the atrocity is somewhere else I don't notice
it.
What about landfills?  Isn't it like thattoo? And now I'm gonna start being conscientious
about my waste.
What about, did may did my shoescome from a place that was
a using child slave labor? Was
animal testing involved in my cosmetics?And you start really taking responsibility
for
the effects that are invisible to us ifwe don't dig but that are very real
in the matter to somebody else. And thatactive saying
compassion and responsibility for thatcompassion come together as the core of
my life.
That I'm actually not just going havecompassion where I care but I don't do
anything about it, but
I'm going have compassion and I'm going to act on it
and that becomes a central definingthing about who I am. That's such an
essential shift.
And it's my belief that
everybody wants to have their life be apositive impact on others' lives,
as they get more informed and they getmore sensitized and that those who are
capable of causing more harm, whether it's to animals or anything,
is both because of a lack of awareness, a lack of resources for other
opportunities and because of their ownhurts and wounds that have shut their
empathy down.
And so it's really a process at helpingpeople to re-sensitize
and to have new resources and strategies and have deeper awareness
which means that going to attack them is the exact opposite of what would help.
Recognizing our sameness with them recognizing the goodness
that's
that's there and then helping to bothhealing offer new strategies is what
relevant.
I think that's a great point to close on andI really appreciate you being with me
today.
I really look forward to delving deeperinto these topics with you
and learning more about veganism. Thanks Michelle, I'm really
excited about your blog
and that you're sharing this with people.