Today we will finish Freud.
 Freud has a peculiar position in the history of psychology, because Freud
 was not a psychologist, but a doctor.
 Many of the clinicians whose theories we discuss were doctors,
 no psychologists.
 In Freud's time, during his training, psychology was nonexistent
 independent science.
 The same goes for Jung. As a result,
 that as the new science of psychology evolved into what you are studying now, the psychoanalysts
 and the medical world, were not involved.
 There has never been a meeting between the ideas of the experimental psychologists
 and the psychoanalysts.
 Although in the 1980s cognitive psychologists proclaimed their discovery of the cognitive unconscious,
 which made me somewhat ungrateful, since Freud, in fact
 had laid the foundations for the theory of the unconscious, and that quite extensively
 almost a hundred years earlier.
 There is some resistance, as a psychoanalyst would say, among experimental psychologists,
 to give Freud recognition for his discoveries. And I think that
 is very unhappy because 1) he made the discoveries, and 2) the psychoanalysts
 still have more insight into the nature of the unconscious than modern experimental psychologists.
 Because modern experimental psychologists are convinced that the brain is a cognitive device,
 something like a computer, and they are not.
 It is a living system composed of other living subsystems.
 That means, as we have already discussed, that is the human psyche and its components
 better regarded as personalities and sub-personalities, than in any other way,
 such as systems or information processing mechanisms.

 I think it is the most fundamental achievement of psychoanalysis, in the footsteps of Nietzsche,
 to think of the human mind, the psyche, as a collection of relatively integrated sub-personalities.
 Even when modern people talk about themselves, they talk about the "me,"
 which is roughly the Freudian ego. They tend to see themselves as a unit.

 The problem with that idea is that people are constantly doing things ... they are doing things
 they don't actually want to do, things they're ashamed of,
 lie if they don't want to lie, or misbehave in general.
 And everyone knows you can try to be yourself
 to command something, but that doesn't really work.
 You have undoubtedly experienced this many times in your own life.
 If you're trying to study for something, you're not really
 interested in, all kinds of alternative options will appear
 in the theater of your imagination.
 What happens in such situations is that parts of you are organized
 for other purposes, or from the Freudian perspective, being driven by other desires,
 trying to hijack your motor systems.
 That happens regularly, you postpone things
 whether you rationalize or shift, those are all Freudian concepts.
 Shift is, for example, that instead of doing what you have to do,
 is going to do something else.
 That's not a bad way to procrastinate, but it's also not great because you
 don't focus on what to focus on.
 In a way, you are at war with myself.
 And the main player in the war, at least in principle, is the ego.
 That is the conscious mind, at least in the early stages of its theory formation.
 It's complicated to talk about Freud because his theory evolved
 in the course of time. In the beginning, he divided the mind into the conscious mind
 and the unconscious mind.
 You can see the conscious mind as yourself, the self
 that you can refer to in your everyday experience.
 And the unconscious mind is a storehouse for two kinds of phenomena.
 Drives, which are anchored in instincts, and can conflict with
 your current goal. Or memories, often traumatic, that you have not been able to integrate
 in your consciousness.
 Those nasty things take on a life of their own.
 If you take an animal, and you take away bigger and bigger parts of its cortex,
 that animal still continues to function like that animal.
 It starts to lose function, especially if you go deep into the brain, and it can
 die if you go deep, but if you stay on the surface of the cortex
 you can remove a lot of brain tissue without its ability to function
 strongly disrupt.
 That shows that the brain is organized in such a way that it has isolated parts
 can act as a full personality.
 That demonstrates, in a sense, that the parts of the psyche,
 or the subsystems of the brain can organize themselves as functional living units.
 That is also understandable.
 If you lose an arm, you don't stop functioning.
 You reorganize your personality without the arm.
 If you've only been able to understand some subsystems of the potential manifestations
 of your psyche, that collection will define the central personality.
 But all things you ignore or cannot integrate will have their own
 live life.
 They don't just disappear.
 So Freud has the disturbing idea that you are not in charge of your own house.
 You can notice that by seeing how you do things
 you don't want to do.
 For example things you don't want to be confronted with,
 'Cause many of the things you don't want to do are things you're ashamed of
 or that make you tense.
 And then there is the defeat you undergo, if your ego is hypothetical
 control the situation, but you discover that your behavior or thoughts are focused on something,
 determined by something you thought you had under control.
 You can see this clearly in conditions such as anorexia.
 Especially when accompanied by bulimia, which is often the case.
 Anorexia is an eating disorder that causes people to take an extreme
 experience disgust for their own body.
 And that disturbs their perception very much.
 I had a client with anorexia at one point, a pretty short woman, maybe six feet.
 Something like that.
 Pretty thin, of course, she had anorexia.
 When she was in my office, I asked if her thigh was wider or narrower than mine.
 She said they were similar.
 So I took a piece of paper, sat on it, and marked the size of my thigh.
 And then I let her sit on the same piece of paper, and she drew the size of her thigh.
 And of course there was about that much space in between on both sides.
 She watched it for fifteen minutes.
 She couldn't believe that it was.
 I think anorexic patients can no longer see their whole body.

 If you look at yourself in the mirror, you have to form a "Gestalt", as it were,
 form an overall picture.
 You can also focus on small parts, but the more you concentrate on parts,
 the more difficult it is to see the parts in relation to the whole.
 And anorexic patients fixate on small parts and confuse themselves.
 For example, if they look at their arm and it has flesh on it,
 they cannot distinguish between meat and fat. And they don't want fat, they want
 just blunt.
 Because they are concerned about this small part, or
 this little part, or whatever they focus on, they lose the ability
 to perceive their body.
 And it's amazing how far that can go.
 And with bulimia, someone starves themselves for a long time.
 We will look at this from modern physiology.
 Eating behavior is regulated by the hypothalamus, which is a very old part of the brain
 that drives fundamental motivation systems.
 It's just above the spinal cord, and it's a very strong control center
 in the brain.
 It functions enough to ... I think I've mentioned this before, that if you have a cat,
 and you remove her entire cortex, and even most of the emotional systems,
 if you leave the hypothalamus and spinal cord in place, which means she has almost no brain,
 then she can behave normally as long as you keep her in a simple environment.
 So the anorexic is trying to starve himself, that's a conscious goal,
 or a goal connected to her ego, you may even see it as a goal that is motivated
 by unconscious forces, because she may not know why she wants to starve herself.
 But what usually happens is that she comes across a situation that upsets her ...
 Being emotionally upset makes you tense or hurts you.
 That activates brain areas that are higher than the hypothalamus, but nevertheless quite low,
 they are quite primitive.
 And what does such emotional upset let's call it stress,
 is turning off long-term planning.
 Because when you're stressed in the present moment, your body and brain assume
 that you must use the energy for the hypothetical future
 to solve the current problem. And that is often a more behavioral one
 solution, such as stiffening, retracting, or the like.
 So it shuts down your prefrontal cortex.
 When that happens, the hypothalamus, a very strong system,
 in action, and dominates the person.
 It's been around for tens of millions of years,
 and his job is to keep you from starving.
 And you can imagine someone in the course of evolution
 who had a relatively weak urge to eat died.
 Those were not our ancestors.
 What happens to a bulimic patient is she gets upset by something, and then
 gets an uncontrollable craving for something very high in calories, sweet and fat,
 makes sense, given that she's starving. And then she eats a bowl of ice cream
 and two loaves of bread.
 And they describe the state they are in when they do so
 as dissociated.
 It feels like they are not themselves.
 You can imagine why.
 It is the whole domain of eating behavior.
 And food is a sub-personality, it's not just behavior or a drive.
 When you think about hunger, it's not like your brain is literally you
 send determined.
 You start to fantasize about food, you start to think about what you like,
 and then you start making plans where to go or what to make
 the social environment, and all kinds of things.
 And that's the hungry "you."
 In an anorexia or bulimics patient, the hungry part of the person is so dissociated
 of the ego, that it is in fact a war.
 But one of the problems with fighting your hypothalamus is that the hypothalamus almost always wins.

 And that's a good thing, because otherwise you would die.
 And many anorexic patients manage to starve themselves to death.
 That's a good example of how strongly the mind can dissociate.
 The brain can dissociate in very strange ways.
 An example.
 I don't remember the name of this syndrome, maybe it still comes to mind.
 You can have a particular stroke, and these are the effects of it.
 You develop the delusion that someone close to you ... Capgras syndrome ... has died
 or kidnapped, or somehow disappeared, and replaced by an identical doppelganger.
 It manifests as something related to psychosis.
 What happens is that the stroke damages the relationship between the visual systems
 identifying faces and the emotional systems that the recognized face connects to
 a familiar emotion.
 Let's say it happens to you with your mama
 you look at your mother, but it is not your mother.
 'Cause your mother comes with a collection of memories
 it has a very large context of memories and feelings.
 You look at that person, and she looks like your mother, but none of that happens.
 Then you develop that idea: “If it's not my mom, but she looks
 exactly the same thing, what is going on? "
 And the answer is, "She's been taken and replaced by a double."
 People get into serious trouble because of this delusion, because
 they become obsessed with solving the problem, "What have you done with my mom?"
 You can understand why. But it is even stranger, because it depends on the medium.
 If they hear their mother on the phone, it must be their mother.
 You see how susceptible the brain is to dissociation.
 Even at the level of small functions.
 There are people who have had a stroke who can sing, but cannot speak.
 There are those who lose nouns, and there are those who only lose verbs.
 And there are people who recognize things, but cannot name them.
 So the idea that the brain can dissociate is clearly correct.
 This is another example.
 You are constantly dissociating.
 If you look at how the brain is structured ...
 Here runs a strip called the motor cortex.
 And if you operate on someone and touch that strip with an electrode,
 he moves the corresponding body part.
 And the hands are overrepresented, and also the face and the lips and the tongue,
 for obvious reasons.
 We root around the world quite a bit, we move our arms and hands a lot.
 The feet are also over-represented.
 And we talk about that with our face and our tongue.
 There is a very large representation of that.
 When you touch it, a movement arises, or at least the person feels a strong urge
 to move.
 From this arose the prefrontal cortex.
 People consider that the basis for abstract thinking.
 That is not a good way to conceptualize it because you are not focused on thinking.
 You are focused on acting.
 The reason you think is to try actions in a small fantasy world,
 before implementing them in your behavior.
 Thinking through something means making an abstract world appear, and then
 to let a representation of yourself act in that world, to estimate its consequences,
 and decide whether to implement it.
 That's another form of dissociation.
 Because you can think without acting.
 That part of yourself with which you make alternative worlds appear,
 is what people strongly identify with.
 The thinking part ... modern people see that thinking part
 as itself, or the part that makes abstract ideas possible.
 If that couldn't be dissociated, you would do whatever you think.
 That wouldn't work well.
 So the brain is basically designed to dissociate.
 If you understand that, and you understand the two kinds of phenomena that often
 being dissociated, then you have the essence of Freudian theory.
 Things that are often dissociated are 1) traumatic memories, I'll talk about that in a minute,
 and 2) impulses ... they are not impulses, not even urges,
 what was the Freudian way of thinking ... they are sub-personalities,
 problematic sub-personalities.
 And you can imagine that they are connected with complex positive and negative feelings.
 Such as rancor, guilt, shame, anger, tension, jealousy, rage, lust,
 all those emotions are difficult to integrate well into a personality.
 For in their pure manifestation they are not ... they disturb the social order.
 Think about how well regulated you are all here.
 It has been six million years since we separated from chimpanzees.
 If we had some chimpanzees who would know each other as well as you know each other,
 this place would be a bloodbath.
 Somehow you can control your old instincts.
 That's how you can see it, and that's how Freud saw it. You learn to control them.
 Freud's theory, and in this respect his differs from the theories we saw earlier,
 for example at Piaget, Freud's theory is more about control.
 He thought all those subsystems and memories were in conflict with each other.
 Like a war.
 Like a Hobbesian war.
 Hobbes was the philosopher who said life was nasty, brutal, and short,
 and that in the natural state everyone is at war with each other.
 And that's why you need a "Leviathan," a control system from above that punishes all deviations from the social contract.

 That is the Freudian superego.
 Freud first thought in terms of unconscious and conscious mind,
 but later he divided it into id, ego and superego.
 And each of those parts had unconscious elements.
 If you are in the throes of a sub-personality from the id, you would, you there
 be aware of it, but it is possible that all sorts of other sub-personalities emerge from the id.
 They are in your unconscious.
 It is also possible, and very likely, that the way you do
 perceive the world, and the way you act, and even the goals you set,
 being affected in ways you don't understand, by these unconscious systems.
 For example, some of you want to be doctors, and if I ask you why,
 you give me six humanitarian reasons, but the real reason is that your grandmother
 would be disappointed if you did something else.
 And she may not even be alive anymore. Your mother may have
 imitated your grandmother, making that ideal strongly embodied by her,
 and thus unspoken expectations about your behavior have arisen since childhood.
 That's an interesting part of psychodynamics,
 for that you have to be on your guard in your personal relationships.
 It often happens, when you observe someone closely, that someone ...
 a loved one, because you have to know him well, that someone is taken over
 through the spirit of being one of his ancestors.
 I don't mean that in a metaphysical way.
 I mean that the thoughts ... the personality of the grandmother, or the personality of the mother,
 has a structure that the person in question knows well, and he has
 spent a lot of time imitating them in different ways.
 And those imitated structures can be passed on from generation to generation.
 That is what partially constitutes your culture.
 The imitated personality of all your ancestors constitutes your culture.
 And that can take hold of you.
 Ideologies can take hold of you ... not in exactly the same way, but in a similar way.
 There is the id, the ego and the superego.
 And as in the Hobbesian world, there is a lot of tension between those parts,
 thus id always tries to get its basic needs satisfied.
 In Freud's time, this was especially problematic when it came to sex.
 The reasons for that are pretty clear.
 They were not reliable contraceptives, there was very little work for women,
 so their sexual behavior had to be very strictly regulated, or else
 they would end up outside the social fabric, into prostitution or something like that.
 And there was the great threat of several STDs, in particular syphilis,
 a terrible disease.
 It can mimic all kinds of diseases and can be passed from mother to child.

 A nasty disease.
 So it was very difficult for the Victorians to integrate sexuality.
 Because how did you do that?
 The road to potential integration, which the superego would approve,
 was marriage.
 Back in the 1960s, people used to get married around
 nineteen or twenty years, but that is historically unique.
 In the Victorian era, a man could not afford to get married,
 until he was at least in his mid-twenties. He didn't have the resources for that.
 Women usually married younger.
 So there was a long time for men, but also for women,
 that the sexual drive (from a Freudian perspective) was fully manifested,
 without any socially approved mode of expression.
 Under such circumstances there is a war between the id and the superego,
 and the poor ego is crushed in between.
 That was evident in the movie we watched, "Crumb,"
 for they were actually in the same situation.
 There was no socially approved way for them to manifest sexual or aggressive behavior.

 And thus, they become fundamental sub-personalities
 highly pathological.
 Particularly characterized by bitterness and the desire for revenge.
 These systems think. If someone is very sexually frustrated,
 and let's think of the wider context,
 because sexuality is not real ... it is not a one-dimensional drive.
 It has to do with playfulness, with the desire for social contact,
 the desire for communication, the desire for touch.
 It is a complex phenomenon with several ramifications.
 The people we saw in the movie had none of that
 integrated in their personality, or allowed by society.
 It got twisted, distorted, and frustrated, and sparked all kinds of ideas
 rancor and revenge.
 So you can develop a very sick subpersonality.
 In that one cartoon that was the most disturbing,
 where Mr. Natural Robert brought that headless woman ...
 He wanted pure satisfaction without responsibility.
 That is really a phenomenon that is driven by the id.
 He slept with her, and immediately afterward felt very guilty.
 Think about what that means.
 It is as if someone is in the grip of one sub-personality, which already are
 thoughts and memories and feelings.
 And suddenly it is satisfied. So he is satisfied, disappears and "bam:"
 the other appears.
 In this case it was guilt, shame, fear, horror, and self-hatred.
 All those things.
 If you read about the experiences of people who commit very heinous crimes,
 it is very common for them to have exactly this experience.
 They are driven by sexual / aggressive impulses, because that's usually the impulses that are
 end in particularly terrible crimes.
 They do that, and then they switch to their normal personality,
 and are completely shocked by what they have done.
 More than one person inhabits the same psyche.
 They are linked by memory, although Freud would say you,
 your memory can also dissociate.
 That's why Freud talked about repressed memories.
 That has caused a lot of problems, for various reasons.
 Because your memory is not an objective recording ... it is not an objective, non-biased recording
 of actual events.
 First, because you cannot objectively record certain events, as we discussed earlier.

 You can have an argument between a man and a woman who have been married for twenty years
 do not record objectively, when it comes to something important, because for them every word, every phrase,
 every sentence and every facial expression, are interpreted within the context of the
 entire relationship, to determine the meaning of what is said.
 And you can't possibly record that with a camera.
 Then you should have filmed the entire relationship.
 And you don't.
 Memory is a very peculiar thing, and the idea that you have one
 objective recording is not very refined.
 Either way, Freud's idea was, in a sense ...
 I hate to say it ... an under-refined idea of ​​what memory was.
 I don't like to say that because Freud was a very educated person.
 But he believed in the existence of an objective interpersonal world.
 He thought if something terrible happened to you as a child,
 that you then had a recording of it in your memory.
 It was there as a memory, as the event.
 Then you needed some kind of censor that would displace that,
 and a place where that would go, and that would be the unconscious.
 But if you're analyzing a traumatic memory with someone ... sorry ...
 He also thought that a repressed memory could be represented in a symptom, a symbolic symptom.

 I think repression theory suffers from the incorrectness of the way memory is represented.
 This is another way to view it.
 It is based on the layered model, the hierarchical layered model that we
 explained in the course of the lectures.
 Imagine you were abused by your uncle (because is usually a family member)
 when you were four.
 Sexually abused.
 The first thing you have to ask yourself is what exactly you have for memory.

 Imagine that you are completely sexually naive, you know nothing
 about sex, its implications or mechanisms, but it happens to you.
 The first question is: how do you represent that?
 Because to remember something, you have to represent it.
 Because you don't just have a memory of the event.
 It's always an interpretation, because so many things happen at the same time.
 So maybe your representation is pain and confusion, something like that.
 And then there is the next layer, namely the need for secrecy.
 Because the one who abuses you will say to you ...
 one of three things: "It's good for you," "You asked for it," "Don't tell anyone,
 because they will think you are bad. This is our secret. "
 Something like that.
 So there is that layer of secrecy and inadmissibility, and what to do with that
 when you are four?
 How are you supposed to understand that something just happened, what to no one
 may share?
 You don't have a model of the world that is sophisticated enough to cover all of that.
 What you might do then is avoid thinking about it.
 That is not exactly the same as repression.
 To avoid thinking about something is not to repress.
 Because it doesn't require an active censor.
 And years later, you begin, perhaps, to remember what happened.
 But what you remember is unclear chaos.
 You may think, "How can things be represented as memories,
 if you can't develop a detailed representation? "
 What seems to be happening, and this is in a sense the reverse of Freudian theory,
 is that the event is represented in the body.
 So you can see the representation of events as a layered neurological phenomenon.
 What happens when you encounter something unexpected or frightening
 the very old reflexive systems respond first.
 And they are fast.
 They protect you against a snake bite, for example.

 If a snake attacks you, you jump back, and you do
 before you even see the snake.
 Because you need about a quarter of a second to create a complex visual representation of the snake
 to produce.
 And if you wait a quarter of a second, you're dead.
 Your nervous system has preserved basic reflexes, only those
 some synapses are long.
 They may work between your retina and your spinal cord.
 Your retina and an old emotional system such as the amygdala are connected
 seeing things like snakes, and it only sends a message to your spinal cord,
 or slightly more complex motor systems, with the message: "Now jump back!"
 And only after that your heart rate accelerates,
 and your blood pressure goes up, and you start to breathe heavily. And then you feel
 a wave of fear and aversion, perhaps to teach you something so stupid
 not to do again.
 We don't know exactly why you would experience negative emotions,
 or what function that negative emotion has, except that we know it is a behavioral pattern
 followed by a punishment or threat has a smaller chance of being executed again.

 So the reaction to the unknown is physical, then emotional,
 then pictorial, in the imagination, "What just happened?"
 And then possibly expressed in language.
 But a lot of things don't transfer from image to language, and some things
 stay at the level of the body.
 Sorry.
 I don't think that traumatic memories have been repressed, as Freud thought,
 if they are not developed.
 Okay, I'll tell a story about how this could work.
 At one point, I had a client who was twenty-seven, and I only saw her once.
 I had just started my training as a psychotherapist.
 She came to me and said she was haunted by the thought
 that she had been sexually assaulted as a child.
 I asked, "Who did that to you?"
 And she said, "It was my brother."
 And she said, "He was much older than me."
 So I made a mental picture of it where she was between ten and thirteen years old,
 and her brother between fifteen and twenty. Because she said that
 she was overpowered by a physically bigger man.
 We talked for a while.
 And then she told me ...
 I asked, "How old were you when this happened?"
 And she said, "I was four."
 And then I asked, "Okay, and how old was your brother?"
 And she said, "He was six."
 So I said, "See, you can see it like this.
 You look at it from the perspective of a four-year-old.
 That is a form of regression.
 That's how old you are when you experience the memory.
 This is a different idea.
 Your brother was not a predator, you were children who were looked after very badly. "
 Then a light came on.
 Because she had never thought about it that way.
 She never had that representation ... her emotional experience
 as a four year old versus a six year old, a six year old is much bigger and stronger
 than a four year old ...
 That is about fifty percent older, which is a big difference when you are four.
 But when it comes to the relevance of the memory for current conceptualization and behavior
 it was much better for her to "update" the reminder and think:
 “A six-year-old is so big, and a four-year-old is so big.
 Where were my parents? "
 And that's a completely different story than the one she came in with.
 That seemed to be a great relief to her. Because if you
 suffer from a traumatic memory, it keeps returning,
 that's one of the ways to identify a traumatic memory that it's not you
 leave alone.
 It appears in dreams and when your mind wanders
 and maybe when you go to sleep
 it enters your mind.
 There is a reason, and the reason is the underlying emotional systems
 dealing with stress, mainly the hippocampus and the amygdala,
 causing that are an alarm system.
 The alarm means something potentially dangerous has happened, you need to find out
 what that means, so that you can prevent that from happening again in the future.
 So you need a plan.
 And to make a plan, you have to make a causal analysis of the relationship between
 your behavior and the traumatic event.
 That's the first.
 And then you have to come up with something that will stop that from happening.
 And with my client that happened immediately, because now she was
 a woman of twenty-seven, and the chance that she would end up in it
 a situation that would be the same as her memory was zero.
 I've seen this with other clients too. I had another client,
 I think I have already told you a little bit about her when she was four years old
 jumped in a shopping cart and drove down a cobbled hill,
 and fell out at the bottom, and hurt himself.
 They took her to the hospital.
 And then she was on edge because of the threat.
 That means you are open to reprogramming.
 And in the hospital they did not allow visits from her parents,
 a couple of weeks.
 So the trauma, the pain, the tension, the threat, the ambulance ride,
 and all those things put her in such a state, what maybe
 is a state in which you are particularly sensitive to learning. Because when something traumatic is going on
 you should learn from that, what the world is like at that moment.
 And she developed a permanent paranoia for institutions through that trauma
 which, by the time I met her, had grown into a whole philosophy of institutional oppression.
 Understandable, but the essence was that combination of physical trauma
 and psychological trauma.
 And the wrong act in that situation by people with authority.
 You can see how under such circumstances a traumatic memory can become the core
 of a great sub-personality, which must be taken apart very carefully.
 Especially if that sub-personality cannot easily be integrated into the world.
 For example, if you are suspicious of all institutions, you really have a problem.
 Because in the modern world you are constantly forced to go
 with institutions.
 And if you're more suspicious and suspicious than you would if you were more educated
 they will treat you badly incessantly.
 'Cause when a dog comes up to you and looks suspiciously and barks and growls,
 won't you pet him.
 The way you interact with the system ... the response of a system to you
 largely depends on how you approach the system.
 Either way, that idea of ​​dissociation is very strong.
 If you want to get to know yourself better, and this is kind of a combination
 of Freudian and Jungian ideas, then what you can do is ... Imagine that
 you have a goal in mind.
 The first question you can ask yourself is: why do you have that goal?
 What influences determined that goal for you? Cause it could be conscious
 either partially consciously, or poorly worded, or implicitly, all those things.
 So you want to know why you do what you do.
 And the second is, if you find yourself avoiding things towards the target,
 then the next question is: why are you avoiding those things?
 That means you have to descend into parts of yourself that are hidden
 and quite uncomfortable.
 So, for example, if you discover that you are pursuing a certain goal because
 your parents want that, the question immediately appears:
 "Yes, but is that what you want too?"
 And that is a very complicated question.
 Because you have to detach from the part of yourself that doesn't want to do it
 the part that wants to do it.
 And then you have to figure out why you are trying to avoid it.
 You may be incredibly angry that you were pushed in that direction
 for reasons unrelated to you. So that every time
 that you have the opportunity to study or achieve something closer to you
 you bring your goal, you are not motivated, you cannot pay attention,
 you can't study, you put things off all the time, or do very counterproductive things.

 People can ...
 Someone wrote to me recently because he was watching the talks on YouTube.
 He said he had been dreaming for six weeks that he drove his car into a chasm and destroyed it.

 At the end of the series of dreams, he drove his car into an abyss, into destruction.
 And he asked what that meant.
 I said, "The dream tells you that you are way too careless with your life."

 That's what repeatedly driving a car into a cliff means.
 That is a descent, an unconscious descent into the underworld.
 He was warned. The psychological reality was such that the warning was very serious,
 like the danger.
 Then you ask the question, "Why would he drive himself into the abyss?"
 That's a suicide gesture.
 Then you ask, "Why would anyone be suicidal?" Well for example
 to take revenge on his parents, or revenge on the whole world,
 or revenge on himself, or he wants to be his
 painful consciousness, or he lives a chaotic and meaningless and harrowing life
 and wants to punish himself for it.
 It is very complicated and confused in depth.
 And people don't like to look at that, and in a sense it is
 "shadow" element.
 Because what you find there is rarely what you want.
 One of the most important guidelines of Jungian psychotherapy, and of most therapies,
 is the idea that you should find out what you are avoiding
 and then discover how to voluntarily confront.
 You can add to that: you have to understand what you are doing and why,
 and see if that's really what you want.
 And whether you like those reasons.
 That's a summary of therapy in a few sentences.
 But in order to do that, you have to look at the things you have been avoiding.
 What do you avoid?
 No rainbows and cookies, right?
 The things you avoid are the things no one wants to see.
 Jung's main guideline for psychotherapy was a Latin phrase: "In stercore invernitur,"
 which I probably mispronounce. It means "it is found in the dirt,"
 or "what you want most is found where you least want to search."
 And that's a terrible philosophy.
 But you can see that it speaks for itself. Of course are the things you avoid
 the things you don't want to be confronted with.
 Of course.
 The shadow of the psyche ... when we watched the movie for example,
 you saw those urges, mainly sexual and aggressive, manifesting themselves
 in several ways.
 Those would be the repressed or non-integrated parts of the id.
 But that had another, more complex side, because they responded to that,
 because they felt trampled and oppressed, and were anti-social and critical
 to social structures, and all that.
 Because they were unable to properly manifest in the world.
 And that created fantasies of extreme destruction.
 In their case, it mainly had to do with sex.
 But in other people that can manifest itself in incredibly violent fantasies
 about the destruction of society.
 So if not all parts of yourself are allowed to participate in the game, the parts will be left behind
 not be happy with that. And they will not happily hold a tea party.
 They turn into twisted monsters, especially as you get older.
 And their demeanor is anything but positive.
 The Freudian world, the world of the psychoanalytic unconscious
 is a terrifying place because it makes you doubt everything.
 It's not paranoia.
 Once you have been psychoanalytically trained, it is very difficult to accept
 that one's charitable motivations are only what someone claims they are.
 You are always looking for the other missing aspect.
 I think that is very useful. Because you meet people, especially ideologues,
 who claim to act for the good of the world.
 Yes ... and you are a saint?
 Why should I believe that the good is only on your side?
 What are you holding back?
 What are you not showing me?
 I once got something from Greenpeace asking for a donation.
 And the folder only contained photos of the people from the management.
 I thought, "Why would I want to see pictures of the people on the Greenpeace board?"

 The other question is: why do they want to show that?
 You don't have to think long to figure that out.
 It's a matter of status.
 What you would expect in such a letter is, "These are six things we have done
 in the past year that have improved the planet. Here's what we spent, and what the
 administrative costs. And this is why that was a good idea. "Not," These are our leaders.

 Something is wrong there.
 I took Greenpeace because it just happened to come to mind, but it happens
 at all kinds of organizations.
 Well, by the time it was 1900, Freud had identified many different functions of the unconscious,
 and these are four.
 First of all, the unconscious had a storage function, which means that it stores memories,
 which are often not accessible for voluntary recall.
 We don't really know how memories are stored in the brain, but this is a conjecture.
 If you have an experience ... imagine that it produces a pattern of neurological activity.
 Not just neurological, but a pattern of activity in your brain and in your body.
 Remembering something is partially reactivating that pattern, but of course it is not that simple,
 otherwise you would actually carry out your memories. We don't know exactly
 how that first pattern of experience is processed into what you remember.
 We do know that it is edited according to the relevance it has
 for your current purposefulness.
 How that happens?
 It seems impossible to calculate.
 We don't understand at all how it works.
 We do not understand how you can calculate what is or is not relevant.
 The world is so complex that it seems impossible.
 The save function.
 The decomposition function.
 The unconscious contains habits that were once voluntary and are now automated. And dissociated elements
 of the personality, who can lead a parasitic existence.
 I've talked about traumatic memories and how they can be a hub for development
 of a subpersonality. But there is something else worth understanding.
 Let's say you start practicing a little behavior modification, a new attitude
 or a new trait, or a new habit.
 It could be a small thing.
 When you start practicing, you are not very good at it.
 For the musicians among you, when you play a piece for the first time, you do
 not very good.
 The more you practice it, the better you can do it.
 It's very strange.
 I am not a good pianist, but I once learned to play a very difficult song.
 But the terrible thing is that I learn to play it, and at some point
 I realize I don't remember the notes, and once that happens,
 I can no longer use those habit patterns.
 And then I have to find out what the nuts are, very annoying.
 Anyway, when you start practicing something it takes effort,
 it requires a lot of brain activity, that's what the scans show.
 But if you exercise a lot, the size of the brain area you use decreases.
 It generally moves to the left, because the right hemisphere is more involved in processing new things.
 Usually it moves to the left, then back, and the area gets smaller and smaller
 until you have set up a small mechanism.
 A small sub-personality of a collection of connections that takes care of that specific action.
 That's interesting because in a way that means that
 your brain is filled with things you've been practicing.
 And that's not exactly psychological, that's psychophysiological.
 It is part of your psyche, but also a network in your brain.
 If you want to unlearn any of those habits, you have to build a new mechanism around that
 to turn off.
 You cannot make it disappear.
 And what often happens with that new mechanism when you are stressed is ...
 I don't know exactly how that works.
 The stress reduces the functioning of the new mechanism and the old habit
 comes back again.
 Some of you will have noticed this.
 How many of you no longer live with your parents?
 How many of you notice that when you go to your parents' house, all kinds
 character traits that you thought you let go of, immediately reappear?
 You know that experience, right?
 You go back and "bam!"
 There is a dynamic, and you are immediately in it.
 And maybe you're as grown as a thirty year old when you're in your own home
 but as soon as you get home, "poof!"
 You're fourteen again.
 This is partly due to the expectations of your parents,
 but also because you just don't understand how much of your behavior is automatic,
 and triggered by events.
 It goes without saying.
 You can also see that as dissociated elements of the personality.

 The creative function.
 The unconscious is the matrix for new ideas.
 That's a more Jungian idea. It seems to work like this ... Ask yourself:
 "How are you able to come up with a new idea?"
 That's not right, right?
 Because are you making something appear out of nowhere?
 You can say that they are combinations of old ideas, but that doesn't really help.
 Because you can't just take some old ideas, shake them up, and so on new
 come up with spectacular ideas.
 It is much more complicated.
 You can see it like this ...
 Freud, in a sense, explored the surface of the creative unconscious,
 he was more concerned with ...
 Jung called the Freudian unconscious the "personal unconscious."
 That is the unconscious you have that is connected to your experiences,
 aware and unaware.
 That can be very deep.
 Jung once had a dream (hopefully I remember well) that he and Freud
 were excavating the basement of a building. And Jung broke through somewhere and found
 a huge structure underneath.
 And that is more or less exactly right.
 So there is the personal unconscious, and below that, in theory,
 there is what Jung called the "collective unconscious".
 And that's ... God knows.
 What it is in part is what makes you human from an evolutionary perspective.

 You have a specific mode of existence, which is a human mode of existence.
 I think it was EO Wilson, an important entomologist, who was also at the beginning of sociobiology,
 a branch of evolutionary psychology ... He studied ants, for a very long time, the social behavior of ants.
 And he said, "If we could talk to ants, we'd have nothing to say to them."
 He meant ... ants are interested in things that you are not interested in at all.
 They don't get jealous, they don't fall in love, they don't have a sexual feeling or behavior, they are not cognitive beings.
 What the hell are you talking about with an ant?
 "How's wearing that grain of sand?"
 An ant doesn't care about that.
 It's interesting, it's an astute observation,
 for it indicates that you cannot communicate with anyone unless you are 99 percent the same.
 To communicate with someone means sharing a very large set of assumptions.
 For example, when I say, "I got jealous of a party last week."
 Then you won't say, "What do you mean by jealous?" That will not be your question.
 You will ask, "What circumstances triggered that response?"
 I don't have to explain anger. I don't have to explain playfulness, hunger ... all basic human motivations
 that you see in a typical adventure movie or romantic comedy.
 They need no explanation, because we are the same.
 And that similarity constitutes the essence of the collective unconscious.
 Jung's hypothesis was that you are not only biologically structured when it comes to your morphology and physiology,
 but that, which also extends into your brain structure, and even beyond, into the content of your psyche,
 or at least in the way your psyche organizes itself over time.
 It seems a hypothesis so self-evident that it seems almost inconceivable that it has been disputed for so long.
 But the experimental psychologists were very much influenced by the behaviorists,
 and the behaviorists postulated, partly ideologically and partly for the sake of scientific simplicity,
 that people were a blank slate, and that we were nothing more than what we learned.
 There is a book out called "Human Universals," unfortunately I can't remember the name of the writer now ....
 It's a sociological / anthropological book, and that person has collected human correspondences.
 What all people everywhere have in common. We all wear clothes. Sometimes for protection, and in any case for ceremonial purposes.
 People form couples, people fall in love, the basic emotions are the same.
 We use fire, that's important. Other animals cannot.
 There are literally dozens of universal aspects that people share, and that is part of the structure of the collective unconscious.
 Anyway, back to the idea of ​​creativity.
 Your creative act is your attempt to connect the uniqueness of your experience with the uniqueness of your culture,
 and the more general phenomena and modes of being that you share with other people.
 Because you come into the world and have your own perspective, you have access to information that is not accessible to anyone else.
 To some extent, that can be the basis for your creativity, that information.
 But to communicate that, which is also part of creativity ...
 If you are creative without anyone understanding you, then you are more schizophrenic than creative.
 You have free associations, but you cannot produce a coherent story.
 You have to integrate that unique information into the cultural knowledge, the cultural narratives, and anchor it in universal human biology,
 and you can present that as a creative act.
 That is a possible source of creativity. Now another one.
 We've talked about Piaget. And Piaget said that in order to understand something, you start with physical action.
 You represent the world with your body. By sitting in a chair, you represent the chair with your body.
 By walking through a door, you represent the door with your body. When you grab a glass, you do the same.
 You tune in, you imitate the world constantly. You map it to your physiological structure.
 So that you get a feeling ... that's what understanding means.
 Because that is a complicated concept to understand. What does it mean to understand something?
 It means having a grip on something. We don't use those words for no reason.
 It means that you are firm in your relationship with it. You can deal with it. Those kind of things.
 That is the beginning, but you can also imitate. You can imitate yourself.
 You do that when you repeat experiences that had a positive result.
 But you can also imitate other people.
 But then you think, "Who are those people imitating?"
 The answer to that is: we are LED screens, as it were, with continuously flowing imitations of imitations, on our physiological surface.
 You are the result of a very long evolutionary development, but you are also the result of a very long development of imitation.
 What you mimic is your culture. You can see your culture as something with a complex personality, the personality of your ancestors.
 That's how you can see it. And you imitate that.
 That is why we call our laws a "corpus" (body). And you can say that the legislation, especially the English "common law,"
 is the articulated representation of imitation customs and rituals of all of society.
 It is put into full wording. But it was already there.
 So what you partly derive your creativity material from is by observing the behavior and interaction between all people,
 which all humans have imitated since the beginning of time.
 And that is extremely educational. Much more educational than you can ever represent.
 You know how much information someone can give by raising their eyebrow half an inch.
 That can indicate irony. It can indicate that a joke is associated with a collection of other jokes that they know you like.
 It is very complex, you cannot articulate all of that. But somehow you know.
 You participate in that game.
 Imagine you embody all of that, insofar as you are a sophisticated player.
 Then your imagination represents you and the world. That's an abstraction, because your imagination is not the world.
 It is a representation of the world.
 What you can do next ... in the imagination there is all kinds of information about imitation behavior,
 and thus you can talk about the image.
 That's what you do when you interpret a dream.
 What is your dream doing?
 Your imagination looks at how you move through the world.
 And you have your categories, systems, theories, et cetera.
 And the dream creates a visual representation of what that could mean.
 In this foreign language, a language loaded with images.
 It can be completely disjointed, containing only sequential images, but also include incredibly complex and refined full storylines.
 This is part of the process in which the information anchored in you and the culture, on a behavioral level,
 moves up into the imagination, and then appears in the articulated domain.
 So you have a dream about you. And then you talk about the dream.
 What are you doing then? You try to translate the images into articulated representations.
 And that's also a good way to conceptualize how memory moves from the bottom to the top.
 Which is interesting ... sometimes you realize, you realize something, or at some point you get an insight,
 and that comes with a feeling. Some kind of electric charge.
 I think you get that charge because you simplify something, but also because of the new possibilities that appear as a result of that realization.
 What seems to be happening is ... there is the behavioral realm, what you embody, and all the things you imitate, it's very complex ...
 and above that is the image of it. And you're trying to get the picture right, but that's very difficult because this changes, and that's smooth.
 You try to get it in order, and above that you try to correctly order your articulated representations.
 So you can talk about what you know about who you are.
 And when that all comes together, you think, "I've got myself in order."
 But every now and then you will have a hunch, like the woman I told you about who was abused.
 The insight was, "I was a small child, but so was my brother."
 "Anxious!" All kinds of things that didn't seem right suddenly fall into place.
 You get an articulate representation that can summarize all kinds of apparently different and separate image representations.
 And suddenly it is much clearer how to proceed.
 Because you know more about who you are and know more about where you are going.
 That's what psychoanalysis is all about. And that is certainly the case with dream analysis.
 Freud was also a pioneer in that area.
 Freud thought dreams were wish fulfillment.
 He thought the function of dreams as wish fulfillment was to protect sleep.
 For example, maybe you are very thirsty, you go to sleep, and you dream about drinking water.
 Those of you who drank too much beer the night before may be familiar with such dreams.
 So you dream that you are looking for and drinking fountains.
 And Freud's interpretation of that was: you must stay asleep, and therefore the dream provides
 your underlying "id-related" motivation system, such as that which controls thirst, of the fulfillment of its desire.
 But I think that's wrong. Though it is strange,
 because dreams could do different things. But what seems to be happening instead ...
 I especially realized this when I heard about an investigation into the effects
 of testosterone, the cycle of testosterone, on female sexual activity.
 So it goes like this. In women the testosterone level varies during the monthly cycle,
 and also their desire for sex. What seems to happen when the testosterone increases is not that
 the frequency of sexual acts necessarily increases, but the frequency of sexual fantasies increases.
 So the hormone drives the fantasies, and the fantasies drive the behavior, something like that.
 So the dream does not fulfill a wish, what happened ...
 that's how the motivation system manifests itself as an action plan.
 You should look for sources of water when you are thirsty.
 Your hypothalamus has to communicate with you in some way.
 He does not take over your behavior, to control you like a robot. He must declare
 What state you are in, he does that in different ways, and then you direction
 making solutions move. Through your memories, your skills, and everything connected
 with successful outcomes of that form in the past.
 Another thing I have to say about creativity, and this is very helpful
 to understand how people react to psychoanalysis ... I have a lot of creative people
 among my clients, for various reasons, and some who are not creative. And creativity is
 a personality trait. Most people are not creative. It is not very common. And some people who are creative
 are so creative it is incomprehensible. Picasso for example
 made 65 thousand works of art, three a day for sixty-five years. That man was creative.
 Many people are not creative, and they are not interested in psychoanalytic ideas.
 They are not interested in archetypal ideas, they are not really in the throes of stories.
 So if you happen to ... by the way, an indication for creativity, for openness, is to like fiction.
 Women like fiction more than men, because women
 score higher on an aspect of openness than men. And what else? If you like poetry
 if that gives you an aesthetic experience, if you find music compelling,
 if you are able to produce things that are creative. If you have a ghost
 that works associatively. For example, if I said to you, "Write down as many words as possible,
 the next three minutes, starting with the letter L. "Those who are more creative
 will come up with more words. So there is also an element of verbal ability.
 I could say, "How many ways can you use a brick?" And I would give points for that.
 First for how many possibilities you have come up with, just the number.
 The nonsensical possibilities, which make no sense, are dropped. And often you need a panel,
 to judge that. Because you may say, "You can use it as one thing."
 Uh, no, you don't get points for that. And then you get a different score for it
 how unusual your answer was. That's about originality. And if you
 that calculates two dimensions, quantity and originality, based on such an alternative thinking task,
 as I just described it, you can predict quite well how creative people are.
 The very creative people seem like one
 to have a deep source of unconscious ideas that are constantly emerging,
 and some of those people dream very much. And they have very delicate and complex dreams,
 and those dreams seem to guide their behavior. And that is very entertaining to watch
 during psychotherapy. If you find that kind of thing interesting. You may ask:
 "How do you know if your dream interpretation is correct?" The answer is:
 how do you know if you have correctly interpreted the last book you read? You do not know,
 and if you did, you don't know how.
 Because many people can read a book and interpret it somewhat differently.
 You can consider the book as a layered pattern.
 And the reader too is a layered pattern. And when you put the two together
 you get a layered pattern made up of the reader and the book, and you will
 are unique with every reader. But we also have common structures
 through which we can communicate about it. So you read the book and it hits you
 some things hit you, and some things seem right. If you interpret a dream
 you work with the client on the interpretation.
 What I usually do is people tell me their dream from the beginning to the end.
 Freud would say you introduce all kinds of assumptions right away, because they don't tell you the dream,
 they tell you the dream as they interpret and remember it.
 Yes, that is a problem. But you do what you can.
 I tell people, "Write it down as soon as you can, without thinking too much about it."
 Because we don't want any subsequent edits. Then I listen to it and they tell it
 again, slowly. Then I listen to a sentence, and I let my ability to associate work,
 and then I see what that reminds me of, and then I ask the person
 what it reminds him of. And then we talk about that. Those are the direct associations,
 the things Freud would call free associations. And you can say that
 around every utterance, such as a sentence, there is a collection of potential meanings.
 These can be direct meanings, strongly related to it,
 and loose meanings. The client and therapist can continue to exchange thoughts
 until you think, "Okay, it seems to be heading that way." And you can see it too
 in relation to the person's actual experiences, and the rest of the dream,
 and maybe all the dreams he's told you before. So it is extremely complex.
 But people also do that when they listen to a conversation. How do you know if
 your interpretation of a conversation is correct? There are several ways
 to approach that, but you're not sure. There are many different ways
 to interpret a conversation. That's why the Postmodernists in one
 black hole with regard to literature. They realized there is no limit to the amount of manners
 to interpret a book. But then they took it a step further:
 "Therefore it has no meaning." No, incorrect. That's a simplistic way of thinking.
 It means that the way the book conveys meaning is very complex,
 you cannot describe it on the basis of normal, linear rationality. That's not to say there is no meaning.
 That is so sad. It's such a sad theory. And it's dangerous too
 for it means that nothing has meaning, and that is the most dangerous theory.
 Either way, you talk to the person about the dream and the dream image, and about
 what that evokes memories. And you also pay attention to what they say because sometimes ...
 For example, this happened recently, someone is describing a dream
 where he's walking around, and he says, "I'm on the wrong road."
 And you think, "Okay." Now we know what your dream means because
 you just said it. "I'm on the wrong track." That's a Freudian slip of the tongue.
 That's interesting because if you listen to how people tell their dreams, you have to listen to ...
 it is as if they have two spirits speaking at the same time. One describes the dream,
 but the other describes his life, and they don't see the connection.
 And you point it out, and they say, "Oh, yeah, I didn't realize I was saying that."
 That's a Freudian slip of the tongue. What's happening is ... the right hemisphere of the brain
 is a system that collects images, a kind of system that collects low-resolution patterns,
 that mainly uses images and tries to create meaningful coherence,
 but that meaning is vague and comprehensive. And the left hemisphere
 the linguistic hemisphere tries to make clear what that means, but in words.
 It's very difficult to make that transition, but that's why dream analysis works in part.
 Because you allow the information to move from images
 to the articulated part of the personality. You move information up the hierarchy of abstraction,
 to the point where it can be used. I will conclude this discussion of Freud
 with a description of research that has been carried out recently,
 relatively recently, for the past twenty years, by a psychologist at the University of Texas,
 in Austin, called James Pennebaker. And Pennebaker is a very smart psychologist.
 Freud had another idea related to therapy. He thought
 that if you were undergoing therapy and talked about a traumatic event,
 that you were then healed by "catharsis." That meant the trauma was linked to a collection of feelings,
 who were oppressed, but who tried to rise from the depths,
 and caused all kinds of stress and misery because you tried to stop them. And if you
 talking to someone about it and expressing your feelings would help you.
 Expressing your feelings doesn't help, by the way. That turns out to be wrong, but
 it is wrong in an interesting and useful way. Because it is almost right.
 Pennebaker dropped "undergraduates" for three consecutive days
 come to the study, and had them write for 15 minutes every day,
 about the worst thing they had ever done or experienced.
 Often people are traumatized by something they've done, not something they've been through.
 More often, because someone sees themselves doing something terrible,
 and thinks, "My God, that's what I did! Who am I?" They have no idea
 and then things start to collapse. Anyway, Pennebaker let them do that,
 and for the next two weeks they were pretty miserable. That is interesting,
 because if they only measured the result of that intervention in those two weeks,
 everyone would have said, "Never write down your traumatic experiences,
 because that makes it worse. ”But in the six months after that, what happened in particular,
 was that their physical health improved. They went to the doctor less, they were
 less often sick, et cetera. That was because their general stress level decreased,
 for complex reasons that we can talk about later. And Pennebaker, a good scientist, thought:
 "Okay, catharsis works." You are venting your trauma, and "poof!" it is solved.
 But then he thought, "Wait a minute, maybe it's important how you express it."
 So he went back and counted all the words that had to do with emotion,
 and all words related to understanding and cognition. And he discovered two things:
 the more words you used, as your story developed,
 that indicated insight and understanding, the better you were, in the long run.
 It's not about expressing your feelings, it's about expressing
 your feelings and weaving the memory into a new coherent representation,
 from which you derive a moral. So what's the moral of trauma? "Don't let it happen again!"
 That is the message. And the threat systems will keep bugging you with that,
 until you fix it. "How did I get into it? How do I keep it from happening in the future?"
 That doesn't mean it's your fault, but your fear systems aren't interested in that.
 They want to prevent you from falling into the same hole.
 And the only way to do that is analyze the causal relationships that brought you to that hole,
 and see if you can change your behavior and attitude,
 so that it no longer happens, or avoid such situations. One of the two.
 The "trauma alarm systems" ... once you have an insightful representation,
 what you are convinced of, they will leave you alone. And that can happen very quickly.
 Like with nightmares. I cured people from nightmares in one session, no problem.
 I ask them to conjure up the nightmare in their imagination. Maybe they are being chased.
 "Okay, imagine they're after you. You have to visualize it, really visualize it.
 The more realistic the better. Okay, you're being chased. How do you feel?"
 "I am very tense and scared." "All right, turn around and see what is chasing you."
 So they do. And then they possibly tell you what it is, but maybe
 they don't even do that. And then I say, "Before you go to sleep tonight, just before you fall asleep,
 you are in a hypnagogic state in which images will appear, and then you do. "
 So they do that and "poof," gone nightmare.
 And that's because they reprogrammed themselves as ... not as something to be haunted,
 like a prey, but like something that can turn around,
 and confront what is haunting them. And that's the same motive as
 the hunt for the dragon in the jungian archetypes. Face what you fear and it will heal you.
 And that is one of the fundamental motives of Freudian psychoanalysis.
 There is a test on Thursday. I will post representative questions on the internet
 when I get home after this lecture, probably tonight. The test will take place here and will be multiple choice.
 It will not be a problem to get it done on time, it is not that big.
 If you have read the literature and attended the lectures, you will probably be fine. It's not an insidious test.
