So I think this part of the course is alwaysa part I have difficulty with, because the
conceptual transformation is very, very large.
Because so far we’ve been talking about,I would say, biological and evolutionary realities,
in a sense.
And we’ve been doing that in a relativelystandard manner.
I mean, there are elements of Piagetian theorythat run through it, there are elements of
cybernetic theory, there are elements of neurobiologyand neuropsychology.
And none of it, I would say in some sense,is radically outside the way these sorts of
problems might be discussed in a typical scientificor social scientific manner.
Except for maybe the fact that we’ve drawnan explicit distinction between the world
as a place of things and the world as a placeof action.
Now there are consequences to the idea thatthe world is a place of action that start
to become more radical at this point.
But drawing the relationship between whatI’ve already talked to you about and the
narrative domains that we’re going to explorenow, requires a… like a radical shift in
conceptual focus.
And so, the way I’m going to handle thatis by hitting it from ten or eleven different
directions, and building up a pattern.
You know, if you listen to a complex pieceof music, or at least this is my experience
with complex music, is sometimes, the firsttime I hear it, I don’t really like it,
and I think I also don’t understand it.
I actually can’t hear it.
You know, maybe a musical genius could hearthe whole thing instantly.
You know, they say Franz Liszt could sight-readanything on the piano first try.
So, you know, some people are so intelligentmusically that it’s incomprehensible, and
I’m sure they hear things just fine thefirst time they hear them.
But then what happens for me is that if Ilisten to it a couple more times or pieces
or chunks of it, they start to fall into placethat I can follow, and, you know, I can see
the beauty sort of shine through those.
And then eventually, the whole thing linkstogether, and then I can listen to it, especially
if it’s a complex piece of music, many,many, many times.
And the more complex, and probably the better,the piece of music, the more I can listen
to it.
But if I listen to it enough, at some pointthen I’ve had enough of it, and it’s all
a very strange phenomenon.
Because one of the things you might ask yourselfis, what exactly are you learning while you’re
doing that?
You know, it seems like you want the musicto be just exactly the right amount of predictable
and unpredictable.
If it’s too unpredictable then you can’tunderstand it and if it’s too predictable
it’s boring, and so it’s just like a conversationthat way.
It’s actually just like life as well!
You know, because you want things to be predictableand stable, and you want things to be unpredictable
and interesting, and the degree to which youwant each of those is going to depend on the
time and the context and also on your ownintelligence and temperament.
Now, I’m going to tell you a bunch of storiesand give you a number of pieces of information,
and hopefully they’ll click together.
Now I think the reason this information hasalways been transmitted in story and image
form is because it’s very, very difficultto transform it into articulated, like into
fully articulated explanation.
It isn’t really how it works.
You know, we’re not really accustomed tothinking about the idea that there are certain
forms of information (that are valid formsof information) that can’t be transmitted
verbally.
But of course, if you think about it, we allunderstand this deeply.
Well, I can give you a bunch of examples.
The first example is that when you speak,not only do you speak in words and phrases
and sentences and paragraphs, but you alsospeak melodically.
And in fact, part of the reason that you canunderstand melodies and that they make sense
to you is that what artists have done is separatedthe melodic elements of speech from the semantic
element, and then played with the melodicelement.
And the melodic element tends to carry a lotof emotion and intent.
And so, if you’re listening to someone speak,you can tell when they’re being ironic,
you know, because they raise an eyebrow, andtheir voice changes slightly, even though
they might be using, in fact they are using,exactly the same words.
And in fact someone who’s very good at beingwitty or ironic will set the situation up
so that you can barely tell that they’rejoking, and the better they are at that, the
tinier the hint they give you that you canstill catch on to, the funnier the situation
is.
So we know that information can be transmittedthrough non-verbal channels.
It even happens during speech.
And then, of course, we understand that musicpresents to us an intimation of meaning that’s
very difficult to fully grasp.
And music for me has always been an ineffablephenomenon in some sense because it carries
the intimation of meaning in a manner thatcan’t be rationally dismissed, or that people
aren’t interested in rationally dismissing.
Even punk rock nihilists listen to punk rocknihilistic music, and they find that meaningful
even though they don’t believe in meaning!
And you know, in some sense they’re victimsof their own rationality, because they do
believe in meaning (or else they wouldn’tbe listening to the music), but they can’t
understand how they could possibly believein it, so their rational mind has dispensed
with the idea.
And sometimes people dispense with the ideaof meaning, for lots of reasons.
Partly because it’s inevitable, in somesense, with sufficient rationality, but also
because it’s always useful to look for theunderbelly of things, because it also justifies
not bearing any responsibility for your life.
And that’s fairly… that can be a verydesirable side-effect of the particular ideological
rational belief.
And then there’s dance, of course, and danceis even more ineffable than music, although
it’s often paired with music, you know,and it grips people.
If you see a remarkable dance performance,well part of it is that you’re sort of thrilled
and excited about seeing just exactly whatthe human form can do.
Perhaps, partly, because you’re human andwhen you see someone extending a certain ability
far beyond the norm then it expands your senseof what a human being is capable of, so there’s
that, there’s the pure skill element.
And then there’s the novelty element, becauseoften if you watch a particularly good dancer
there’s things they do that you haven’tseen before that you didn’t know anyone
could do and that’s pretty fun.
And then often the dance is joined with themusic and the body is expressing what the
music means and even though you can’t tellwhat the music means you can tell that the
dance is expressing it.
See I think what happens there is that musicrepresents the patterns of being.
It’s actually because people think of musicas a non-representational art, but I think
that’s wrong, I think it might be the mostrepresentational art.
Being is made up of layers of patterns constantlyinteracting, and hopefully in a relatively
harmonious way, and music demonstrates that,mimics it in some sense, abstractly.
And then the dance is an abstract representation.
People adapt to the patterns of being andthe dancer adapts to the pattern of music,
and so it’s symbolic, it’s an embodieddisplay of the place of the person in the
cosmos.
And you could also make that case when yousee people dancing in pairs, because you could
dance alone or you could dance in pairs, andthat’s basically standard human adaptation.
And music is interesting too because one ofthe things you’ll notice is that there’s
always music in a movie.
Almost always.
There’s the odd movie that doesn’t haveit but it’s quite marked when it’s absent,
you know.
The movie feels a lot more cold and clinical,although it can work.
But we accept the idea that music can be usedto fill in the missing context in a movie
without even ever questioning it, right?
Like, it’s very strange if you think aboutit, that you go to a movie that is doing…
at least part of its function is to portrayreality in a realistic way, but there’s
a soundtrack playing in the background allthe time.
You know it’s so useful and so appropriatethat you don’t notice how strange it is
that that’s okay.
So, my point is that we well, and then ofcourse you can talk about novels and plays
the same way, because there’s a lot moreto a novel than the words themselves.
There’s you know, a novel is a deeply layeredthing, and part of your understanding of the
novel is your understanding of the interrelationshipsbetween the layers, especially if it’s a
profound novel.
I mean I think that’s why we have this senseof depth in artistic and literary works.
If the work is deep then it has many, manylayers, and the more layers it has interacting
at the same time, the more it’s a usefulrepresentation of the essential elements of
being, and so the more meaningful it is tous.
So, that’s all to say that there are modesof communication that provide us with information
that we can’t articulate but that we stillact as if that information is valid.
And you might say, well, valid for what, whatexactly is it doing, what is it representing,
what kind of information is it offering that’sso compelling?
And what’s so interesting about it is thekind of information that we’re talking,
that information is so compelling, that you’llpay to expose yourself to it.
You know, it’s a rare lecture that you goto and have to pay for the lecture itself.
I mean, you’ll come to the university andyou’ll get your degree, but if you had your
option on a Saturday afternoon, or a Saturdaynight, let’s say, it’s relatively unlikely
that you would attend a lecture, and certainlyeven more than unlikely that you would pay
to attend one, but you’ll certainly payto go somewhere to dance to music.
And, you know, why that is, is not obvious.
You say, well it’s entertaining.
It’s like, yeah it’s entertaining alrightbut it’s a lot more than that, and I think
that dismissing things that are enjoyableas entertainment, which means that they’re
sort of peripheral, they’re unimportantin some sense is a real, it’s a real terrible
habit of psychologists.
So for example, when Steven Pinker wrote hisbook… it’s a book on language and unfortunately
I can’t remember its name at the moment…he devoted one chapter at the end basically,
to non-verbal cultural forms and he talkedabout them as epiphenomenal, fundamentally.
You know, they’re just a by-product.
And I think that’s deeply wrong, I thinkthat our culture actually grew out of dance
and drama and music, and science came way,way later than that.
I was watching an old video today.
It was of The Animals playing House of theRising Sun in 1964.
It’s a pretty good video, and it’s a greatold song.
I mean, they didn’t write it, it’s anold blues song, but it’s a great old song
and they do a pretty good job of it.
And the audience was full of girls and theywere screaming madly away.
Now it wasn’t quite as bad as The Beatles,which was completely unbelievable, but it
was still, you know, a fairly continual dinof delighted shrieks.
And, you know, I think that’s extremelyinteresting because you’d never see that
at a scientific conference [students’ laughter].
Well, it’s strange, eh?
Like, there isn’t anything else that elicitsthat kind of response.
Maybe sports to some minimal degree, but certainlywith nowhere near the same amount of enthusiasm.
And you know, I mean, that’s been happeningfor a long time, it wasn’t merely a phenomenon
of the 60s.
I mean, I suspect it’s been happening eversince there’s been wandering minstrels,
and that’s a very, very long time.
And I suspect that those wandering minstrelsleft many offspring behind them [laughter].
And well, what’s interesting about thatis, obviously part of the reason that human
beings can sing is because we’ve selectedeach other for that ability, right?
I mean there’s something very attractiveabout someone who’s artistically gifted.
And the idea that women will do backflipsfor a singer is not necessarily any negative
comment on their ability to evaluate what’simportant, it might be quite the reverse.
So anyways, the point is that there’s lotsof different ways that we can communicate
information.
And you might say well it’s only simpleinformation that can be conveyed that way,
and you have to convey the complex informationin more formal forms, scientific and philosophical,
but I think that’s exactly backwards.
I think we get to articulate the simple stufffirst, which is only what you expect, right?
Because when you’re mastering somethingdifficult, like the unfolding of being, the
probability that you’re going to get tothe simple things first and the complicated
things later is pretty much 100%.
And I mean, different fields advance at differentspeeds, but the artists and musicians get
to the complex matters far before the scientistsand the engineers.
And it has to be that way.
One of the deep things I learned from Jungwas that, as our knowledge expands out into
the unknown, there are people operating atthe periphery, and so they really have one
foot in the unknown and one foot on dry land,so to speak.
And some of them are more in the water thanthe others.
And the ones almost submerged up to theirneck, when they tell you what they’re seeing,
it has to be poetic and musical and artistic,because it’s so far beyond our capacity
to articulate, that we can’t represent itin words.
And so all that can happen is that the artistcan get hold of it, and maybe the people who
are prone to religious-like sentiments, atleast experiences, which seems to be associated
by the way with the trait openness.
To have the actual religious experience, ratherthan to be an adherent of the dogma, which
is associated with low openness.
So for Jung, it was the artists and the entrepreneurs,because they’re the same people, who were
at the forefront of the expansion of whatwe know into what is unknown.
And I think you can see echoes of that inthe way in which cities are rejuvenated.
Because what happens, you can certainly seethis in Toronto, is that a part of the city
that has some architectural or contextualinterest but is badly run down, starts to
get… at some point, you know, the artisticpeople show up and they think “Hey!
This is kind of cool.
If we just did this to it there’d reallybe something to it”.
And it usually doesn’t hurt that the rentsare low because of course artists never have
any money.
So then they go in there and civilise thehell out of it.
And of course, they’re renting, and thatjacks up the property value, and then the
people who are a little less open but kindof interested in art start flowing in behind
them.
And then soon the whole place is rejuvenatedand expensive, and of course the artists have
to go somewhere else.
But that’s a very interesting phenomenon,because what’s happening is that even in
the cities they’re taking chaos and turningit into order, and that’s what artists do.
Now that’s all to tell you that there aredifferent ways of transmitting and representing
information, and that you can incorporatethe information without any articulated notion
of what you’re doing.
So of course that’s the case, because otherwiseyou’d have to claim that you understand
everything that you do and can articulateit, and that’s just wrong, you know.
You have a theory of yourself but it’s nota very accurate theory, which is why you’re
always doing things that are strange as faras you’re concerned, which is also extremely
bizarre.
It’s like, who the hell are you if you can’teven control your own behaviour?
And what does it mean to control it, and whatdoes it mean to not control it?
These are very, very complex and strange issues.
Alright, so I think the best way into thisis actually from an evolutionary perspective.
And I’m not convinced that this is correctbut I think there’s something to it.
So when you think about the nature of experience,then you think, well the nature of experience
is quite different for different sorts ofcreatures.
And one of the primary differences betweencreatures is the degree to which they’re
capable of social interaction and then ofcomplex social interaction.
And primates generally speaking are very socialcreatures.
They live in troops, or packs, like dogs.
Which is why we can get along with dogs, becausewe understand each other.
Being hierarchical troop animals, we understanddogs, and they understand us, and they can
fit right in, pretty much.
And we’re very, very good at figuring outwhere we are in the troop.
And by ‘we’ I mean primates.
I mean that’s going back a very, very longperiod of time.
You know, monkeys and chimpanzees have verysophisticated knowledge of the social structures
surrounding them.
They know who’s who, and they know whatstatus they are, they know what rank they
are, essentially.
And that’s also the case with people.
And so one of the things you might say aboutpeople is that our reality isn’t nature,
exactly.
It’s culture.
Now, you can make the argument that you can’treally distinguish nature from culture, and
I believe that that’s true and untrue, ina sense.
I think you can talk about the human and non-humanelements of reality.
And you can identify the human elements ofreality as culture, even though culture is
so old that you can also think about it asan inevitable part of nature.
So anyway, so most of our experience in ourevolutionary past, at least let’s say for
the last several million years, we might aswell go back to when the ancestors of humans
hypothetically split off from the ancestorsof chimpanzees.
And people know very accurately when thesesorts of splits occur, by the way, because
what they do is they have some sense of therate of transformation of DNA.
You know it transforms and the rate is fairlyconstant across time.
And so if you take two creatures and you determinehow much genetic similarity there is between
them, and how much difference, you could calculatehow far back they diverged.
And so, the fossil record helps with that,although it’s very sparse.
But the DNA record is not very sparse at all,in some sense, so you can be very accurate
about it.
We can even tell when people evolved or learnedto wear clothing, and the reason we can tell
that is because there’s certain kinds oflice that can only live on clothing, and they
seem to have diverged from the lice that livein hair about 50,000 years ago, something
like that.
And so the hypothesis is that, well, we musthave been figuring out how to wear clothes
at that point because the lice figured outhow to live in them.
So, you know, it probably took them a littlewhile, but I doubt if it took them very long.
You know those little creatures that breedfast, man those things can evolve quickly,
much to our dismay.
So okay, so a big part of the experientialfield of advanced primates is the social world.
And so we could call that the primate world.
And we could also say that another big partof their experience is the non-primate world,
which would be, roughly speaking, the naturalworld.
And then we could also say that the otherelements of their experience that are very
constant are their subjective being.
And we don’t know much about the subjectivebeing of creatures like chimpanzees, although
you can understand, I think, the subjectivebeing of a dog well enough to befriend the
dog.
And so you have some insight.
And I think it’s also reasonable to assumethat…
I mean for a long time people were unwillingto admit that animals had a soul, that was
the first problem.
But after that, that they were conscious.
And even the behaviourists fought that notion.
But I think the simplest thing to do is toassume that animals and human beings are the
same, except when you can prove that they’redifferent.
Because we share so much of our evolutionarypast then the logical inference is that if
you think a dog is doing something sort oflike you would do in that situation, and feeling
that way, it probably is, with certain exceptionsfor species difference.
And if that wasn’t the case I don’t thinkthat you could have a relationship with the
dog, or cat.
You can’t have much of a relationship witha lizard, although there are lizards, bearded
dragons in particular, that are social.
They like to lay on top of each other andthey hang around together.
And you can actually have more of a relationshipwith them.
And apparently the same is true for iguanas.
So you can go quite a ways backwards in evolutionarytime, and still have enough similarity between
you and the creature that you’re interactingwith, so you can get a pretty good sense of
at least some element of their being.
And so, the idea that subjective, or subjectivity,is a very ancient part of our experience,
seems to me to be a perfectly reasonable supposition.
We certainly know that it’s been around,in all likelihood, for at least 150,000 years
(on the conservative side), because therehave been human beings that are essentially
identical to us, from a genetic perspective,going back 150,000 years.
But I think you’d have to be a pretty harshjudge to assume that higher-order primates
like chimps don’t have some consciousness.
And you know, and some limited self-consciousness.
You know, if you mark a chimp’s nose withlipstick and then show it a mirror, it will,
at least sometimes, take the lipstick offits nose.
Although I’ve seen a gorilla try to fightwith a mirror.
Well no, I haven’t personally seen that,but I’ve seen a very good video of that
happening.
But I think the gorilla in it would eventuallyfigure out that it was him in the mirror.
Dogs will recognise a dog in the mirror, butthey seem to ignore their reflection very,
very rapidly.
And I don’t know if that means that theyhave a very rudimentary self-consciousness,
and that they figure out that that dog isthem, or if the dog just doesn’t smell like
a dog, and then the dog thinks “well itcan’t be a dog because it doesn’t smell
like a dog”.
And dogs probably think that something isa dog because of how it smells, and not because
of how it looks.
I think that’s why dogs don’t seem tohave any sense of relative size.
Because you can get a little Chihuahua barkinglike mad at a Great Dane and you think, really?
That’s going to work, is it?
But the dog doesn’t seem to have a clueabout that, like he’s perfectly happy.
And the Great Dane, weirdly enough, will oftenback off.
Anyway, okay, so we’ve been in a socialworld, a deeply social world for a long time,
and I’m also going to make the presuppositionthat we’ve been in the stratified social
world for a very long period of time.
And I think you could call that, if you wantedto, and I would never want to, by the way,
you could call that the patriarchy.
I think that I wouldn’t call it that becausethat’s not what it is.
But I think that the fact that it’s calledthat, and that that’s accepted as a reasonable
representation is actually a consequence ofthe action of an archetype.
And the archetype is that, it’s the archetypeof the terrible Great Father, actually.
Because you think, well there’s a socialstructure with striations in it, and that
has advantages and disadvantages.
And the advantages are that you can live init.
And the disadvantages are that you have tofollow the damn rules, and they might not
necessarily be to your individual benefit.
So, within a social dominance hierarchy, there’salways a bifurcated, it also always has bifurcated
significance.
It can be good, and is good, insofar as itprotects you from, say, from threat from without,
maybe from other primates invading your territory,for example.
But it can also be a very dismal structureif you happen to be at the bottom of the hierarchy.
So anyways, as far as I can tell, that dominancestructure is typically represented as masculine.
And I think the reason for that, althoughI’m not absolutely certain of this, I think
the reason for that is that our social hierarchiesare probably more like chimp social hierarchies
than they are like bonobo social hierarchies.
So, the bonobos are kind of a strange breedof chimps.
I don’t know how many of you know aboutthem.
But the bonobos are extraordinarily sexualand they use sex, pretty much as a standard
means of communication and tension reduction.
And there’s a lot of sex between the femalesand the bonobo troops, and the use of sex
seems to bond them together in a way thatkeeps male aggression under control, which
is quite interesting.
But in the chimps the fundamental dominancehierarchy is male, although there’s a female
dominance hierarchy as well, and some femalescan certainly be more dominant than some males.
But the fundamental structure seems to bemale.
And then I would also say, well, it’s probablydependent to some degree in the primate community,
and in other social animals, on other factors.
So we know, for example, that the gender thathas the highest level of testosterone tends
to be the dominant gender.
And so in hyenas the females actually havea higher level of testosterone.
They’re actually bigger and more aggressivethan the males, and the price they pay for
that is that they have to give birth througha structure that’s very much like a penis,
which is not the world’s most pleasant experience,and might account for the hyenas’ temper.
But, in human beings, you know, you see sexualdimorphism.
Men are slightly bigger than women, and that’salso generally characteristic of creatures
that have a dominance hierarchy that’s tiltedtowards masculine.
And then the other factor seems to be thathuman beings have… our infants have very,
very, very, very long periods of dependence,and it’s very difficult to manoeuver your
way, doing anything, really, especially anythingthat has to do with competition and power,
if you’re taking care of one infant, letalone three.
And so, it seems to me that those are allvalid reasons why the primary power structures
among human beings have typically been male,and why they’re represented as masculine.
Now there are other reasons too, because thisis a multi-faceted phenomenon.
I mean, one of the things that’s interestingabout human females is that they’re selective
maters.
Now chimp females are not selective maters,and what that means is that the dominant males
still have most of the offspring, but thereason for that, apparently, is because they
chase the subordinate males away from sexuallyreceptive females.
Although the sexually receptive females willsneak off behind the rocks somewhere and mate
with the subordinate male.
But as long as the dominant male is aroundthe probability of that is quite low.
So the female chimps aren’t sexually selective,whereas human females have concealed ovulation,
so that no one knows when they’re at theirmost fertile, and they’re selective maters.
And women in every society virtually, that’sever been studies, have a typical pattern
of behaviour, which is that if you look atthe female dominance hierarchy and you look
at the male dominance hierarchy, the femaleswill mate across and up dominance hierarchies,
and the males will mate across and down.
Which works fine for both genders, becausetheir interests align.
But it also means that in all likelihood womenhave exerted tremendous sexual selection pressure
on men, and that might be part of the reason,of the many reasons, that we actually… you
know the theory is that the common ancestorbetween chimps and humans was probably a lot
more like a chimp, a modern chimp, than likea modern human.
So for whatever reason, we’ve undergonea lot more transformation in the last 7 million
years than chimps have.
And one possible reason for that, and I thinkit’s a highly probable reason, is that sexual
selection operated a lot more viciously, soto speak, among humans.
It’s operated to the point where you havetwice as many female ancestors as male.
And you might think, well that can’t bepossible, but here’s how it’s possible.
It’s like, only every second man has children,had a child, while all women had one.
Now of course, that isn’t what happened,but on average that’s what happened.
So the proportion of men who are completelychildless in any given generation is far higher
than the proportion of women who are.
So you see an element of expendability inmales, and that’s typical across the biological
community, because you don’t need as manymales as you need females in order to keep
the population moving forward.
And one of the things that happens as a consequenceof that, at least in principle, is that males
are more behaviourally variable and variableacross a lot of dimensions, than females are.
And that’s a plus, because they’re morevariable on the upside, but it’s also negative
because they’re more prevalent on the downside.
Now there’s some substantial argument aboutthat in relationship to people, what the actual
implications of that are for human beings.
One potential implication is that althoughwomen and men have equivalent IQs, the standard
deviation is slightly different.
Which means that there are more males whoare intellectually impaired, but there are
also more males who are four and five standarddeviations above the population mean.
You don’t need much of a difference in standarddeviation in order to produce radical differences
at the extreme.
So I’ll give you an example.
Males are more aggressive than females amonghumans, but the effect is only about half
a standard deviation.
And so what that means is that, if you takea female and a male randomly from a population
and you were trying to guess who was the moreaggressive of the two, most of the time, you
know about 60% of the time, the male wouldbe more aggressive than the female, but 40%
of the time it would be reversed.
So you know, that’s a lot of overlap.
But then here’s the rub.
So let’s say just for example, that amongthe population of men and women combined,
only the most aggressive person out of a hundredends up in jail.
Those are all men.
Because that tilt towards aggression is enough,so that when you go way out on the distribution,
the only people who are that extreme are men,even though the population difference isn’t
that great.
So anyways, there’s a massive debate inthe relevant literature about the potential
consequences of that for things like cognitivefunction, because there’s some indication
as well that men are more cognitively specialisedbut women are more cognitively robust.
Anyways, it doesn’t really matter.
But what does matter is the fact of this permanentdominance hierarchy.
Now, the dominance hierarchy, the male dominancehierarchy, also has another feature.
So we already said that, you know, on average,men are half as likely to leave offspring
as women are.
And so what that means is that all thingsconsidered… this isn’t…
I’m not trying to make this into a circularargument.
Because I could say it’s the more successfulmales that leave more offspring.
But then you’d say, well that’s the definition,Darwinian definition, of success.
But I don’t mean Darwinian success, becausethat’s self-evident.
What I mean is, if you look in the modernworld for example, and you try to predict
number of available sexual partners for agiven male, your best predictive measure of
that is income.
And the best predictive measure of that isintelligence and conscientiousness.
And so, what happens is that males orientthemselves in groups, and then they compete.
And then women peel off the top.
And so the women are in a position of judgmenton men, and the judgment is the judgment of
nature.
Now, from a Darwinian perspective… you know,when we think of nature we think of, well
it depends on who you are, but if you’rean environmentalist you think of a French
impressionist landscape, you know, forgettingthat nature is also malarial mosquitoes and
cancer, and rats infected with bubonic plagueand all those other lovely things.
But, from a Darwinian perspective, you candefine nature much more straight-forwardly,
and more accurately, as that which selects.
Now, you know, you hear a lot about naturalselection, and natural selection basically
assumes that there is a random distributionof alteration in genetic structure, in any
population, in any generation.
And some of those random alterations willbe more suited to that particular environment,
suited being they’ll live and they’llreproduce.
And genetic transformation takes place acrossthe millennia as the organism chases the landscape,
roughly speaking.
But Darwin, you know, Darwin, who was an unbelievablyintelligent person, was also very, very interested
in sexual selection, and as far as Darwinwas concerned, sexual selection was just as
powerful in modifying genetic structure, indriving evolution, as natural selection.
And that’s been very underplayed by biologists.
That’s only started to switch in the last…
I would say it hasn’t switched that muchyet, but it started to switch probably in
about the last 25 years.
And that’s because the idea of sexual selectionmakes things a hell of a lot more complicated.
Because, well first of all, in a standardDarwinian account of evolution, there’s
no place for mind, there’s no place fora creator, there’s no place for teleology.
And teleology is something moving towardsan end, a goal, right?
But the thing is, if sexual selection is operative,and if consciousness is ancient, then mind
has been operating through sexual selectionas long as there’s been sexual selection.
So you think, do you have any choice, do youmake any choice in who your sexual partner
will be?
And the answer to that is, well it’s hardlyrandom, you make a choice!
And what’s interesting is that, you know,if you take 60 people, let’s say if you
took 60 women, and you showed them a bunchof men, and you asked them to rank them in
terms of their attractiveness, there’s goingto be very consistent rankings.
You know, I mean, we know what makes up attractivefacial features, for women and for men, it’s
easy to determine that.
What you do is you take 60 faces and you averagethe features.
So you don’t get the average person, becausethe average person is more like a median,
you get the averaged person.
And the averaged person has perfectly symmetricalfeatures that are nicely shaped, and fairly
big eyes, and they’re very nice-looking,they’re very attractive.
And so, that means that there’s like a centralhuman form, in a sense, that we find attractive.
And we see this in other species, for examplethere are butterflies who won’t mate with
another butterfly if it’s like a sixteenthof an inch out of symmetry, because it’s
not a butterfly of that type, you know.
And that’s how people think too, if youdeviate from the averaged person, the less
canonically human you appear, and the lessattractive you appear.
And, you know, we’re chasing this idealin some sense that’s an emergent property
of the nature of our species.
And then, you know, there’s certain physicalcharacteristics, wide shoulders in men, and
narrow waists.
In women, it’s waist-to-hip ratio, a verycommon marker of beauty, across cultures,
and across body types, interestingly enough.
So, if you take thin women and heavier women,and you get men to rate the attractiveness
of the women within that category, the heavywomen and the light women who have a waist-to-hip
ratio of about 0.68 are the ones that arejudged most attractive physically.
And so, that actually correlates, by the way,with fertility, because the abdominal fat
in a young woman is a sign of ill health andalso a marker of decreased likelihood of conception.
Now none of this is operating consciously,obviously, it’s deeply wired into us, it’s
part of our mediate perception.
But it still does indicate that there’san ideal, like a platonic ideal, lurking at
the back of our minds, against whom we compareeveryone that we meet.
And then you might say, well what’s thenature of that platonic ideal, and that’s
a very, very complicated question.
You know, I would say that you could almostliterally claim that the… well you can certainly
claim that the ideal male is represented inmythology as a hero.
And that’s actually what mythology is about,it’s about representing ideal patterns of
behaviour, so it’s hardly surprising.
And so, you know, if you go to a movie, andit’s a romance, and there’s the main lead
character that you’re supposed to fall inlove with (if you happen to be the kind of
person that would fall in love with that kindof person), then he’s going to act out a
particular pattern of behaviour.
And the pattern of behaviour is quite identifiable.
So for example he’s going to move forwardand explore, and not hide and cower.
And the probability that he’s going to becreative is very high, and the probability
that he’s going to be good-looking and strongis very high.
And so, those are archetypal features.
And those aren’t all the archetypal features,because those are, in some sense, those are
the self-evident ones.
But you know, people are also evaluating eachother for things like intelligence, and personality,
and character.
And you could say in some sense that men arecompeting to be the best man, and women are
watching the competition to take the man whowins on the presupposition that he wouldn’t
win if he wasn’t the best man.
It’s a very, very intelligent strategy.
Because why not outsource the problem.
Let the men sort it out, well as I say, it’stoo cognitively complex to compute.
You could say that the male dominance hierarchyis equivalent to the stock market.
It’s exactly equivalent to the stock market.
The stocks are always competing with one another,and with every other commodity, for primacy
of price and value, and that’s exactly whathappens with male competition.
So one of the things that we’ve just discoveredin my lab, this is Caitlyn Burton’s work,
it’s very cool, is that we took… we weretrying to understand the fundamental sub-structure
of conservatism vs. liberalism.
And I’m going to speak in terms of conservatism,because that’s how we construed the data,
although we could’ve done the reverse ifwe were going to construe liberalism.
And what we did was we took, we got a bunchof people to sit down and write down a bunch
of statements that they though conservativesvs. liberals would disagree with.
You know, I think we had, I don’t rememberhow many statements, 300 statements, something
like that.
We had a lot of people generate them and takethem from news items and so forth, because
we didn’t want any bias in the initial questionset.
Or we didn’t want a bias that wasn’t therein the actual world.
So we had many people do this, and then wegave these questions to many, many people
online, in a variety of stages.
And we extracted those out that seemed tobest fit the data, and then assessed them
for the utility in predicting things likeparty membership or voting behaviour.
And so we got a good structure, it makes alot of sense, and what we found with regards
to conservatism was that there was an ethnocentrismfactor, it was the third and weakest factor,
and that would be associated with in-grouppreference vs. out-group derogation.
So those are anti-immigrant people, fundamentally,you know, and they’re, well they’re ethnocentric.
That’s the simplest way to explain it.
And then the second smallest factor was religioustraditionalism.
And most of this was done with Americans,for a variety of reasons.
And that was really where the fundamentalistChristians nested.
And not everyone… that was not only a factormade up of fundamentalist Christian beliefs,
but they loaded heavily.
Those were people who weren’t for stem cellresearch, they were anti-abortion, they were
anti-gay marriage.
Or they were pro-traditional, which is howthey see themselves.
And then, the largest factor was a factorthat we called ‘masculine independence’.
And it was more characteristic of men, andwhat it basically consisted of was an attitude
that winners win and losers lose, and that’sjust how it should be.
So it was the men who… the personality predictors,one of them was extroverted assertiveness…
hunting and the right to own firearms alsoloaded on this factor, but it was masculine
competitiveness, I think, is the best wayof thinking about it.
And I think it’s a good illustration ofthe kind of individual attitude that makes
you more likely to attempt to climb up dominancehierarchies and dominate them from the top
down.
And that’s not necessarily something thatwould be associated with factors like compassion.
Well, I’ll leave it at that.
It’s just that you can see…
I’m telling you that because you can seehow these proclivities manifest themselves
in all sorts of areas of behaviour.
I can tell you something else that’s veryinteresting about men and violence.
I don’t know if I can get this story straightbecause it’s been a while since I told it.
So there’s this interesting phenomenon,that’s very characteristic of societies,
I believe pretty much everywhere it’s beenstudied.
Now, you can calculate an index called theGini coefficient.
And the Gini coefficient is a number thatrepresents how much inequality of income distribution
there is in a given geographical area.
So you could calculate a Gini coefficientfor a street or an area in a city, or a city,
or a state, or a country, you can do it atall those levels.
And what you find is that, you know you alwayshear this idea that poverty causes crime.
That’s a classic left-wing idea.
But it’s wrong, it’s seriously wrong.
And it’s importantly wrong.
And it’s definitively wrong, not only that.
So there’s no argument about this, it’salready been established.
What causes crime, especially aggressive crime,is relative poverty, and relative poverty
is not the same thing as poverty at all.
It’s seriously not the same thing.
Poverty is when you don’t have enough toeat.
Relative poverty is when the guy next doorhas a much better car than you.
And there’s lots of relative poverty inthe United States, and there’s some absolute
poverty, but even the absolute poverty inthe United States is nothing like the absolute
poverty say in places like India or sub-SaharanAfrica, where absolute poverty means you have
nothing.
Now, what’s really interesting about theGini coefficient is that if you go to places
where everyone, roughly speaking, is poor,say by national standards…
I think South Dakota was often used as anexample, or maybe one of the Maritime Provinces…
like Newfoundland, where there’s low averageincome but it’s pretty flat distribution,
there’s almost no crime.
And if you go to places where everyone’srich then there’s almost no crime.
But if you go places where there’s poorpeople and moderately well-off people, and
rich people, and the distribution is reallysteep, then the rate of aggressive behaviour
among young men, and it’s usually withintheir own ethnic group, starts to sky-rocket
out of control.
And the reason for that seems to be that,if the dominance hierarchy is too steep, then
the young men have no likelihood of climbingto a dominant position while playing the standard
social game.
And so what they do is turn to aggression,to make their mark on the world.
And it works, too, that’s the other thing.
Make no mistake about it, if you’re lookingfor status where status is hard to achieve,
and you’re the meanest, toughest guy around,and, you know, around a bunch of people who,
like you, don’t have much money, then you’regoing to benefit from that status.
It works.
Yeah?
Would that be part of the reason why… becauseI know that, I think that violent crime rate
in the US is higher than it is in Canada,would that be part of the reason why?
Sure, yeah, I mean you can make a real conservativeargument for making sure that, you know that
conservatives are very anti-income distribution,and we figure that’s because of the guys
that have this male independence, you knowthey have this male independence factor, they
don’t want to be distributing resourcesto people who are down the dominance hierarchy
because they want them down the dominancehierarchy!
They want there to be a difference betweenthe people on top and the people on the bottom,
so that they can be the people on top, sothat it increases their relative attractiveness.
Like it’s a perfectly logical game.
And they presume that, well the rules areset up, and like every man can go for it,
do his best, and the winner wins and the loserloses, and that’s just how it is, and “don’t
ask me to fix it because I don’t want to.
And besides that I find it distasteful toattempt to fix it”, more than that, right,
because it’s a moral issue, it’s not justan intellectual issue.
So you can make a case, however, from theconservative point of view, especially with
regards to, say, beliefs in religious traditionalism,and the desire to maintain social stability,
that you shouldn’t let income distributionbecome too unequal.
Like one of the big things your society hasto do is to make sure that doesn’t get out
of hand, because it tends to get out of hand,it tends towards a few people having everything
and almost everyone else having nothing.
In a sense, it’s a natural consequence ofeconomic progression, which is actually something
that Marx pointed out.
Although an Italian named Pareto had figuredit out at approximately the same time, and
I think with a lot more conceptual clarity.
But, the more unequal you let your societyget, the higher the probability of death,
roughly speaking, through violent causes.
But I’m telling you why it is that, youknow, men want to climb the dominance hierarchy,
and the reason they want to climb the dominancehierarchy is that they get access to women.
I was going to, actually ask earlier in thediscussion, when you were talking about the
familiar and the unfamiliar and the structure.
So it seems like we all want to live withina structure, but we don’t want the rules
to apply to ourselves.
Well, we have this contradictory problem,we want to be protected by the structure but
we want to advance our position within it.
And so that means, what that should mean,and this is I think the definition of civilised
behaviour, is that you’re allowed to advanceyour position within the structure as long
as you don’t disrupt it negatively.
And I think that most people do do that.
In fact I think people in civilised countriesdo that so effectively that it’s an absolute,
incomprehensible miracle.
I can’t understand how or why it ever gotestablished.
But like a psychopath will climb the ladderand cut the rungs off underneath him, fundamentally.
He doesn’t even care if the damn thing maintainsitself.
You know, he’s perfectly willing to haveit destroyed after he’s exhausted it.
But if everyone acted like that or even ifa substantial number of people acted like
that, the whole thing would come to a halt,virtually in no time flat.
So I mean, why… see, you might… here’sa reason… you know, because one of the things
we were talking about is masculine violence.
Now the thing about masculine violence isthat it only tends to emerge in situations
where there don’t seem to be any other reasonablyviable means of advancing status.
So it’s not reasonable to say that men areaggressive.
You can say that on average men are more aggressivethan women.
And you can also say that if you put men ina situation where they have no, where they
can see status differences but they have nomeans of moving forward, that they’re likely
to turn to aggression as a way of establishingdominance.
And then you can say that, the reason forthat is that it makes them more attractive,
the fundamental reason.
Yeah?
Yeah, I’d just like to add on, I read thisarticle once that talks about how polygamous
societies are more violent than monogamousones.
Yeah, absolutely.
I was going to say maybe it’s because whenone guy has two wives that means that 50%
of the population has no wives, no accessto sex.
Yeah that’s exactly right, the evolutionarypsychology explanation for the pathology of
polygamy is that once you let it establishitself then then men get ultra-violent.
So would you say that monogamy would almostbe a basis for civilised society?
Many people have said that, and yes I thinkyou can make a strong case for that.
And I think the fundamental reason is theone you just pointed out.
You know the idea is, well, would you ratherhave one woman, or die, you know?
Sorry no, that’s not quite right.
It’s more like, would you be willing tolimit yourself to one partner or have a shot
at many partners but a much higher probabilityof dying.
Right, and you know, some guys will take that.
They’ll take the high-risk approach.
So now, this doesn’t eliminate the differencein individual differences in determining who’s
going to be aggressive, because what willhappen is that as the Gini coefficient pressure
rises, the more aggressive men, the men whoare more aggressive by nature, will get more
aggressive first.
So you can imagine, it’s a threshold phenomenon,in some sense.
And what I should tell you as well is thatthe relationship between the Gini coefficient
and male-on-male homicide isn’t 0.2 or 0.3,which is the correlation that you’d get
if you were predicting something like thatusing personality.
It’s like 0.8 or 0.9.
It’s like it eats up all of it, it’s theexplanation.
So it’s a huge effect, it’s so big aneffect that you can basically say that oh
well, we figured that out.
Although psychologists never know when they’vefigured anything out, and they keep endlessly
retesting it over and over and over, becauseyou know, we don’t know how to bring our
science to a stop.
But if you don’t accept the Gini coefficient-aggressiondata, that’s like, you might as well throw
the rest of social sciences out the window,because the effect is unbelievably powerful.
What geographical area does this take placein?
It depends… you can do it on any level ofanalysis.
You can do it by county, you can do it bycity, you can do it by state, and you can
do it by country, and it works on all of thoselevels
Student: Like, it predicts aggression, almost?
You bet.
Yeah.
And that’s a great question.
I mean, the methodologically sophisticatedstudies have done exactly that, to ensure
that it’s actually this phenomenon ratherthan other factors that might be operative
in that particular geographical area.
So countries with a higher Gini coefficientare more violent, and cities within that country
that have a higher than average Gini coefficientfor that country are more violent on average.
It’s a very, very robust finding.
Alright, so we’re going to say, for thesake of argument, that you’ve got the male
dominance hierarchy, and it’s representedas masculine.
Now, one of the things Jung said, now he thoughtthat women carried an image of men in their
unconscious.
And he thought that the image that women carriedof men in their unconscious was a group of
men, not an individual man.
He called that the animus.
Whereas he believed that the image of womenthat men carried in their collective unconscious
was of a single woman, and he called thatthe anima.
Now I’m just telling you that, I’m notgoing to justify it, or even discuss it, but
I just want you to keep that in the back ofyour mind.
So I guess part of the reason I’m tellingyou that, come to think of it, is that I think
it may provide some insight into why the ideaof the patriarchy has become such a well-accepted
notion.
Because it is an archetypal notion, but it’sa one-sided archetypal notion.
Okay, so back to sexual selection.
Now, we already talked about the fact thatbiologists perhaps were uncomfortable with
the idea of sexual selection, because it bringsa non-random factor into evolution.
A seriously non-random factor, because youhave to go back as far as you can in history
to where there was no choice, on the partof the organism, to attribute evolution to
natural selection alone.
And you have to go back a long ways back,as I said, even butterflies are perfectly
capable of distinguishing between a high-qualitybutterfly partner, in butterfly terms, and
a low-quality butterfly partner.
And you know, insects have been around fora very, very long time.
So we have no idea, what that actually meansis that we have no idea what role choice has
made in the evolutionary process.
But one thing that you can infer is that thereason human beings are the way they are now,
and not like chimps or human ancestors, isbecause the sexual selection process got started,
and it was intense.
And so, as a consequence of that, here weare.
And so, you know, maybe it was a good thing.
Although it’s very hard, in some sense,on all those people who failed.
And that’s, you know, roughly speaking,twice as many men as women.
So then that all raises the question, likewho exactly is responsible for the male dominance
hierarchy?
Because you could say it’s male competitiveness,but you could also say, yeah well it’s an
inevitable function of female selection.
Which is not an argument that you hear veryoften.
But I think it’s a very difficult argumentto escape from.
And that leads us to our next hypothesis.
So we’re going to say that the masculinedominance hierarchy is represented as masculine.
I’m going to call that The Great Fatherfor the time being.
And that’s the permanent dominance hierarchyof men, and it’s always there, it moves
through history.
It’s different men all the time, but themen slot in and out as they are born and die,
but the structure itself stays intact across…forever.
It’s always there.
It’s been there at least for millions ofyears, so for our purposes we’ll just call
it permanent.
It’s a permanent part of experience, andit’s a big part of it.
And you know, as culture gets more and more…covers larger and larger expanses of territory,
gets more and more sophisticated, it’s anever larger part of reality.
I mean, most of us spend almost all our timecoping with the dominance hierarchy, and almost
none of our time combatting nature.
You know, you get wet for a little while andthat’s it, you know, but most of the problems
that you would face in a purely natural environment,you’re so distant from them that you could
hardly imagine, you can’t even imagine whatit would be like, in some sense, to be in
an environment like that.
Yeah?
I have a question.
Like your explanation of what drives men tobecome competitive and vindictive of the hierarchy…
what drives women?
Like for example there’s an aggressive natureof women and there’s some sort of competitiveness
in women, let’s say at the University ofToronto.
So 
what is driving women to try to elevate theirlevel in the hierarchy?
Well, that’s a good question.
So the way I would answer that question istwo-fold.
So the question was what drives women to moveto the top of the hierarchy?
It’s something that’s worth discussing.
So if anybody objects to what I’m goingto say, then please do, because I’m not,
you know, dishing this out as received truth,it’s…
I’ve been trying to figure this out andthis is what it looks like to me.
The first thing is that I think there are…male and female dominance hierarchies both
exist but they’re different.
And that females compete with each other intensely,but they don’t compete for the same things,
and they don’t compete the same way.
So let me tell you a little story, this isa bit of a divergence, but it’s an interesting
point.
And one of the questions I’ve always beenasked in this class… because I’m going
to lay out a hero story, and the fundamentalhero archetype, and the hero is masculine
in mythology… and so the women always ask,well what about the role of the woman?
And it’s like, it’s very, very complex,which of course, all you women already know,
because it is very, very complex.
But it isn’t something that… first ofall I don’t think it’s a question that
would’ve been asked before the inventionof the birth control pill.
Because we know what the archetypal femaleis, prior to that.
It’s the Virgin Mary with child, it’sa virgin with child.
Which means that the unit for woman is ‘womanwith child’.
It’s not woman, it’s woman with child.
And, well, it’s obvious why that is, becauseas soon as you become a woman, in most societies,
you have a child.
Before that, you’re a girl, and that’s,you know, that’s in some sense irrelevant,
in terms of your destiny.
Now you might say, well what’s your archetypalpattern if you’re not a mother?
Well, the way it looks to me is that there’stwo archetypes for personal development, for
the personal path, roughly speaking.
There’s the hero, and that would be theperson that explores the unknown and discovers
something of value and brings it back anddistributes it to the community.
So it’s like a hunting… it’s probablypredicated on a hunting platform, because
our bodies are hunting platforms, basically.
And one theory about what men did, which isa very probable theory, is that they went
out and hunted for meat.
And chimps like meat, they’ll eat it wheneverthey can, although they’re not very good
hunters.
But they will definitely eat meat.
And human beings are so good at hunting thatwe probably… well, for example, we probably
wiped out the mammoths.
And when human beings came into North America,there were as many different kinds of large
animal in North America as there were in Africa,and human beings killed all of them.
And that was just with… you know, like theydidn’t have our notion of technologically
sophisticated weapons, it was bows and arrowsand clubs and spears.
Nonetheless, they got rid of everything, youknow.
Large cats, giant beavers, mammoths… we’revery, very, very, very dangerous.
Anyways, there’s another archetype, I wouldsay it’s a maternal archetype in a sense,
and one of the things that’s very interestingabout human males is that they’re quite
maternal, by comparison to other animals.
So for example, the mother bear doesn’thave the male bear, the boar… is it boars
and sows with bears?
I think it is.
Anyways, you keep the cub away from the male,because he’ll kill them.
Now, not all males will do that but many will,they don’t have any filial attachment.
And that’s the case for many but not allcomplex mammals.
Pair bonding on a permanent basis is relativelyrare, but joint provision of children, that’s
exceedingly rare.
And men are pretty good at taking care ofchildren.
I would say they’re not as good at takingcare of infants as women are, because they
don’t have the full range of resources athand.
And they’re not, I don’t think they havethe same kind of immediate intuitive understanding
of, or attraction to, babies that women have.
I think that switch is around the age of twoor two and a half, when the kids can engage
in rough-and-tumble play.
Because men are much more likely to engagein rough-and-tumble play than women are, and
rough-and-tumble play seems to be one of thethings that civilises children.
And it’s partly because, you know one ofthe things you have to learn when you’re
a child is what actually hurts you and whatcan be ignored, and what actually hurts someone
else and what can be ignored.
And the best way to learn that is in rough-and-tumbleplay.
Because what happens is that if you’re playingwith a kid, they get more and more excited
and they do more and more crazy things, untilthey do something that either hurts them or
hurts you, and then you have to say, look,you can’t do that.
And it’s like a dance in a sense, you know,when you’re playing with a kid.
And you have to let them win fairly frequently,because otherwise they don’t continue the
game.
And you can tell that because if the gameis going well then they’re laughing with
insane life, because kids just love rough-and-tumbleplay.
And they love crazy things and catch themand they think that’s just great.
But partly what you’re doing is you’reextending their body in all sorts of ways
and getting them to learn, in an embodiedsense, where their limits are and where the
limits of other people are.
And that’s embodied.
And children who haven’t had that, man they’rejust so awkward, it’s unbelievable.
You know, they might have some hypotheticalsense of how to interact with another person,
but they don’t have an embodied sense ofit, and they can’t tell the difference between
what hurts them and what doesn’t.
Because often a young child, if they’restartled, they’ll start to cry.
And then you can say, well that didn’t hurt,and then they’ll notice, well yeah it didn’t
hurt, and they’ll stop crying.
But if they haven’t had their limits tested,they’ll cry at anything unexpected, even
if it doesn’t hurt.
And that’s not good, because if you cryunder all conditions the probability that
you’ll make friends when you’re threeis zero.
Because another kid will start playing withyou and maybe playing rough, and if you burst
into tears, you know, several times, the kid’sjust going to go somewhere else and find a
different playmate.
You know, they’ll say you’re just a baby.
Which is roughly, exactly accurate… roughlyexactly [laughter]… roughly accurate!
Anyways, back to the archetypal representation.
I think really the way to think about it isthat for men, the hero archetype is the archetype
that’s dominant and in the forefront, andthe maternal archetype is subordinate and
in the background, I mean inside their ownpsyches.
Whereas with women it’s reversed.
So each of the genders can play the role ofthe other gender but there’s a tilt in each
of them towards the… what would you say?
Well I would say towards typical gender-normativebehaviour.
Now the social constructivists believe thatno such thing exists, but those people are
so pathological that even considering whatthey have to say is a mistake.
So, you know they act as if there is no biologyand everything’s cultural, and it’s like,
well no, that’s just not right.
Now what biology means in practice and whatyou should do about it, that’s a whole different
question, but to think of all these differencesas socially… height differences between
men and women are not socially constructed,and they’re relevant.
And the upper-body strength differences betweenmen and women are not socially constructed,
and they’re relevant too!
So one of the things I was wondering about,maybe you guys can help me clarify this or
tell me where I’m not thinking about thisproperly, and if you think there’s any…
if I’m missing something let me know.
One of the things my daughter said, she watchedmy son one day have a fight with his best
friend.
It was a physical fight, you know.
His best friend did something that my bestfriend didn’t regard as appropriate and
so he hit him, and then there was a fight.
And then three days later they were friendsagain.
And my daughter said to me that she was veryannoyed by that, which wasn’t the fight
exactly, but the fact that they could havea fight and then they were friends again three
days later, because she said that that optionwasn’t available to women, right?
And the option is, the option that the menhave is, “well if you get out of hand I’ll
just sock you one”, and then we’ll haveestablished where the boundaries of behaviour
begin and end.
And I would say that in my experience, ifI’m talking to someone who’s self-confident
and masculine and accomplished, there’salways an undercurrent of potential violence.
It’s an undercurrent.
And that’s actually an undercurrent of respect,which means that there’s things that we
can do to each other in a civilised way, butthere are rules that if you break, all hell’s
going to break loose.
And one of the consequences of that is thatit doesn’t.
Now the typical bullying pattern for womenin high school and junior high is reputation
destruction.
And I’m wondering, what are the implicationsfor the conduct of behaviour if there is no
recourse to aggression to solve disputes?
Because they don’t get solved.
You know, I’ve tried to analyse what itmeans to say ‘no’ to someone, because
‘no’ means something.
‘No’ means… well if you tell a child‘no’, what you’re basically telling
the child, as far as I can tell, is if youcontinue doing that something you won’t
like will happen to you.
And if you’re civilised and say no whathappens is you say no a couple of times and
then instead of devaluing the word, whichis what you do if you just said it over and
over a hundred times with no consequences,you take action that’s non-verbal.
And so one of the things you might do is removethe child from the situation, or you might
put them on the steps.
Or maybe you put them on the steps and theyrun away, so you have to hold them on the
steps.
But the point is, the point to the child is,there are limits, and if you exceed them,
you will be physically controlled.
What if there’s no option for physical control?
What happens?
Well I don’t know the answer to that, Idon’t know what women do about that but
I also don’t know what men do about thatin relationship to women.
So I was watching something the other day,it was this…
I posted it on my Twitter account as an exampleof animus possession.
So a woman and a man were having a disputeon the street.
It was a political dispute.
And this particular woman, the way she wasbehaving towards this particular man, was
such that had she been a man, and had he beena man, he would have definitely hit her.
Because she was right in his face, and shewas cursing at him and swearing and calling
him an idiot.
And really being hyper-aggressive.
And of course, he couldn’t do anything aboutit.
So then I was watching that and I was thinking,just exactly what are you supposed to do in
a situation like that?
Because you’re screwed no matter what youdo.
If you’re on the male side, it’s like,you certainly can’t intervene physically.
It’s like you’re dead in the water instantly,instantly, in your eyes, the eyes of society,
and in the woman’s eyes, instantly, if youmove past the boundary.
If you leave, well, there’s no glory inrunning away, that’s for sure.
So what exactly is supposed to happen?
I have no idea what’s supposed to happenin a situation like that.
I think what happens, what will happen overtime, is that men just won’t put themselves
in those situations.
I think what the male would have to do inthat situation is behave like a woman would,
in a female dominance hierarchy.
So he stands there and takes it and afterwardsgoes off and bad-mouths her to her social
circle.
That’s a form of aggression.
Right, right, but you know that’s definitelynot seen as an admirable form of behaviour
among men.
I mean, I don’t think it’s an admirableform of behaviour, period.
But I mean, you know, aggression is oftennot admirable, so that’s fine.
Yeah?
I think that when you take away emotion, likewhen someone’s acting really aggressively
towards you and you reserve your emotion,it gives them a lot less to feed off of, and
that ends up taking power away in a similarway that aggression does.
Because people react aggressively and theywant feedback that gives them more excitement…
Oh definitely.
Oh yeah it would’ve been a real victoryfor her if she would’ve gotten slapped.
Absolutely, because it would prove everythingshe said instantly.
Yeah, but when you dismiss, power’s gone.
So then you have all the power.
Yeah, yeah.
Well I think that that would be a reasonablyeffective strategy for a street confrontation
like that.
I’m not so sure how well it would work ina prolonged competition inside a company,
for example.
In a hierarchy, yeah, because you know thetruth of the matter is that men have no idea
how to treat women if they’re in male powerhierarchies.
They have no idea how to treat them.
And that’s because we have no idea how todo that.
No one has any idea how to do that.
It’s only been happening, in any pronouncedsense, for about, well, on a societal level,
really probably since the mid-70s.
You know, it’s three generations.
It’s a drop in the bucket.
And it’s a very, very difficult thing tosort out.
So, I mean part of the reason I’ve beenthinking about these sorts of things is because
I’ve been very interested in the fact thatmen have been doing very badly in junior high
and high school, and they’re bailing outof universities like mad.
At the rate it’s going there’ll be almostno men in most disciplines within ten years.
I mean you can tell that even in this class.
It’s funny because on my YouTube videosI look at the gender distribution for viewing
and it’s 80% male, which is interestingto me.
I’m not sure exactly why that is.
But in lots of fields it’s 80:20 women already,and I can’t see why that won’t…
I think that’ll accelerate as we move forward,rather than slowing down.
Alright, so anyways, back to sexual selectionand the power hierarchy.
Now from a Darwinian perspective, one of thethings you might do is call whatever selects
‘nature’.
And so when we think of nature and we thinkabout nature from a scientific perspective,
we don’t even think about humans as agentsof nature, right?
We tend to think of the human being as somethingthat stands against nature.
That’s in mythology.
It’s like, the human being against the naturalworld, it’s a very common plot in movies
and stories.
So it’s man against nature, roughly speaking.
So we tend to think of those as separate categories.
But if women do the selection among humanbeings, at least they do the intense selection,
then women are nature, for men.
And that’s exactly what the archetype is.
It’s Mother Nature.
And Mother Nature has a very vicious element,and the vicious element of Mother Nature is
rejection.
And that can be maternal rejection, whichis, you know, certainly something that causes
a tremendous amount of trauma.
But it can also be the most fundamental formof rejection, and the most fundamental form
of rejection is sexual rejection.
Because it means that you are judged as biologicallyunworthy, roughly speaking.
And there’s other reasons why… so thereason I’m telling you this is because I’ve
been trying to puzzle out… what you seein mythology quite clearly is that the dominance
hierarchy is represented as male, so cultureis male, and nature is female.
Well, why the hell would nature be female?
It’s like, okay, well I’ve given you onereason, and I think it’s the primary reason.
There’s other reasons, because nature isalso seen as that which produces natural forms,
and of course, women produce natural forms,so that’s a logical association.
And then, what’s the other one?
Well, we can leave it at that for the timebeing.
So, now let me show you how 
I think that that’s represented.
I think this is the way the world is structuredwhen you consider it as a place of action.
So the world as a place of action has characters,like the elements are characters, and the
characters are engaged in dramatic behaviour.
And there are classes of characters, and asfar as I can tell, this is a reasonably comprehensive
classification of dramatic characters.
We’ll start from the inside and go out.
And you can think of any of these as primary,by the way, and you’ll see that reflected
in different kinds of mythology.
So sometimes the maternal is primary, andsometimes the culture is primary, and sometimes
the hero, the individual is primary.
And I think that’s because these three thingsare irreducibly primary.
In that, from the perspective of consciousness,in that, to be conscious, there has to be
you, but if you’re conscious you have tohave evolved within a culture and that’s
culture is necessarily nested in the naturalworld, and so wherever there’s one there’s
all three.
And the individual’s also the thing… withoutthe individual there wouldn’t be any separation
between nature and culture.
So you can see the individual consciousnessis the generator of the entire structure,
but you can say that about any of the characters.
So there’s the archetypal son, because thehero tends to be masculine, and then, it has
a… that character has a positive elementand a negative element.
And the positive element is the good person,and the negative element is the bad person.
And I would say the archetypal representationsof those are, like, the saviour, and Satan.
And that’s basically… there are portrayalslike that in virtually every system of mythology
and religion.
Now it seems to me that in some sense Christianity,and this was probably under the influence
of the Zoroastrians, developed the most articulatedrepresentation of good vs. evil at the individual
level.
And that’s why you can identify two fundamentalcharacters in the Christian story, so to speak,
that play out these roles.
And they’re seen as eternal adversarieslocked in battle across time.
And that would be, the battle takes placein the natural world, the battle takes place
in the cultural world, and the battle takesplace within, as well.
And you can see that reflected in storiesall the time, because, you know, it’s so
frequently the case that the hero, the super-herohas his nemesis.
And it’s the guy that he’s extraordinarilywell-matched with who continuously tests his
wits and whose motivation is essentially destructive.
So you see that with Batman and the Joker,for example, or you see that with Sherlock
Holmes and Moriarty.
There’s always this pairing and that’spartly because I think the archetypal realms
of human decision-making are something like,are you working to make things better or are
you working to make things worse?
Are you possessed by resentment and hatred,so that you want things to degenerate and
burn, or are you hopeful and capable of manifestingfaith in the future so that you’re working
to make things better?
And then there’s a battle in everyone, intheir own psyches, and then there’s a battle
in culture.
There’s a battle everywhere between thosetwo fundamental perspectives.
And then the archetypal son is the son ofthe Great Father, and the Great Father represents
two things, order and tyranny.
So there’s the hero and the adversary, atthe individual level, and at the social level
there’s order and tyranny.
And so, roughly speaking, that’s eitherthe wise king or the despot.
And the despot is someone who tries to eathis own sons, which is actually a fairly common
mythological trope.
And you know, you’re under the thumb ofthe despot when you’re not allowed, really,
either to be hero or adversary.
You’re just a cog in the structure of thesocial world.
So that’s despotism.
On the orderly side, well, culture is whatwe’re sitting in right now.
I mean, this is social order that encapsulatesus.
Everything about it is social order.
I mean, there are rows, they’re roughlylinear, you know everyone’s in their place,
everyone knows what to do, we’re unbelievablyprotected from virtually anything you could
possibly imagine.
And so you know, we’re in our father’sliving room, so to speak.
And in that living room, it’s a safe space…oh God I should never have said that… [laughter]
anyways, it’s a well-protected space inwhich people are able to play and explore.
And it seems to me that one of the functionsthat fathers play in a family, if they’re
fulfilling their function properly, is thatwhat they do is they put a perimeter around
the territory, so that inside the walls, soto speak, it’s safe, and inside the safe
walls the children can play and explore.
And in their playing and exploring they developtheir own individuality.
And so, you know, you keep the darkness atbay, and you can certainly see that that’s
what the children want, because as soon asyou put them in a dark room, the first thing
they say is, you know, come chase the monstersaway out from underneath the bed.
And you know they wouldn’t be thinking thatif they hadn’t had an extraordinarily long
evolutionary history of being chased by monstersin the dark.
And there are monsters in the dark, and everyoneknows that.
Which is why you tell your children not togo play at night after it’s dark, even now.
So order and tyranny are the representationsof culture.
And the thing is that there’s a constantinterplay between those two because you can
never tell exactly when order has gone toofar and become tyranny.
Andy you can never tell really when there’sso little order that, well the next thing
happens which is the emergence of chaos.
And chaos is the Great Mother.
And it’s creative and destructive.
And that’s nature itself.
And then on the outside, the very outside,and this is the most complicated category
of all, is that, it’s the dragon of chaos,and it represents something that’s very
difficult to conceptualise.
But it’s the un-configured substructureof being that gives rise to these other categories.
So Donald Rumsfeld at one point made a veryfamous comment, it became famous because it
fits an archetypal structure.
He said that there are known unknowns andunknown unknowns.
Okay, the dragon of chaos is the unknown unknown.
It’s so unknown that you don’t even knowit’s there, but it can raise its head at
any given point.
It’s the thing that leaps out of you inthe darkness.
It’s like, is it Zika, is that the new virus?
It’s like the Zika virus.
It’s like, no one saw it coming.
It’s a completely new manifestation of being.
And so, known unknowns you can make plansto circumvent, unknown unknowns, they’re
completely unpredictable.
And what’s so interesting, this is whereit’s so bloody complicated, because you
really have to think about things differentlyto grasp what this means.
This is part of the reason why I had troublewith this section of the course on alchemy,
because it’s so complicated that it’s…okay, so here, think of it this way.
What is the unknown made of?
That’s a pretty weird question.
So I’ll try to walk you through it, andwe won’t get very far with this, because
we’ll have to do it 15 or 20 times I thinkbefore it starts to become something that
you can grapple with.
Alright, so it’s September 11, 2011 andthe Twin Towers have just fallen.
Sorry, 2001, yes, 9/11.
Alright, what’s emerged?
What’s happened?
Well, one answer to that is that the towersfell, but it’s a very, very poor answer.
Because that was an unknown unknown, I wouldsay, and it traumatised people.
I mean everyone, even in Toronto, walked aroundin shock for about two days after that.
And the reason for that was that we didn'tknow what fell.
The buildings fell, but the thing is the buildingsaren’t isolated.
Like, they’re not some abandoned buildingsstanding out there in the middle of a field
in a barren wasteland in the middle of anabandoned country.
They weren’t buildings, exactly.
They were only buildings at a superficiallevel.
First of all they had 5000 people in them,or 5000 people died, if I remember correctly.
And then all those people were networked outwith all sorts of other people.
And they were networked at multiple levels.
So they were family members but they werealso elements of the financial and economic
machine.
And in the political machine.
And then what was hit was of course, not justthe buildings, but the economic and political
system, whatever that means.
And of course the people who took the towersdown weren’t trying to knock buildings down,
which is what you saw happen, they were tryingto knock down the things the buildings invisibly
related to.
And then you might ask well, what were thosebuildings invisibly related to?
And it’s a simpler question to actuallyreverse the question and ask, well what weren’t
they related to?
And the reason that people were traumatisedin the aftermath was because when we, when
our bodies, in some sense, answered that question,the answer was, uh oh, those buildings were
probably attached to everything in every possibleway.
And so God only knows what’s going to comeleaping out of that.
So what happens when you see the buildingsfall, the facts that you see the buildings
fall actually blinds you to what’s happening.
It’s a very peripheral representation ofthe actual event.
Because you could also say, well it was apsychological event, you know, it echoed inside
of you.
Well, you don’t see that, you feel it, andyou don’t really know what it means.
But it puts a wave of uncertainty, a radicalwave of uncertainty, into everything.
And not only the present, but also the futurefor sure.
Because things took a vicious turn after that,and almost immediately, right?
The whole political system readjusted itself,it became much more authoritarian.
You know, airports became little fascist enclaves.
You know for me, for many people, I couldhardly go into an airport.
It just drove me crazy to be lined up likethat and then subject to search, you know,
by faceless representations of the paranoidstate.
God, that’s a horrible thing to have toencounter.
It’s a bloody horrible thing to train peopleto get accustomed to.
It’s really dangerous to train people toaccept that sort of thing.
It was a way worse consequence I think, thanthe buildings falling down themselves.
But that was one thing that happened.
What else happened?
Well the one trillion dollar surplus thatwas projected by the Clintons at the end of
Bill Clinton’s presidency, which was theprediction for the next ten years, that the
economy was doing so well that the US governmentwas going to have a one trillion surplus over
the next ten years, turned into a four trilliondollar deficit.
So that happened.
Well and then we got tangled up even worsein the Middle East, and of course that, I
think that’s probably got worse as time’sgone on rather than better.
And we have no idea where that’s going toend.
You know, I mean Russia’s involved now,and Russia rattled nuclear weapons at Turkey
the other day.
You know, even though Turkey’s their largesttrading partner and a member of NATO.
And then you know, a million refugees floodedinto Europe, and God only knows what’s going
to happen as a consequence of that.
And it’s not like the people who plannedthe bomb didn’t know that, like here’s
what they thought.
They thought “oh, the Soviet Union, thatwas the second greatest power on Earth, and
then they waded into Afghanistan.
And they got tangled up in a terrorist warand oh, poof!
Ten years later they didn’t exist.
Maybe we could do the same thing to the UnitedStates”.
It’s like, well, who knows?
Maybe you could.
I mean they certainly… the response to the9/11 disaster, in my opinion, was much more
expensive than the disaster itself.
I mean, one of the things that’s quite horrifyingis that here’s one statistic: nobody flew
in the aftermath of 9/11 for a while.
Like airplane flight bookings were way down.
More people died in car accidents (becauseof not flying) than were killed in the bombings.
And no one ever noticed that, because peopleare being killed on the highway all the time,
right?
I mean it’s background noise as far as we’reconcerned.
But you know, it’s a really good exampleof how not only do you not know what the event
is, you can’t even tell who the event killed.
And so it’s your apprehension of that, whenit occurs, that paralyses you.
And so that’s the dragon of chaos, roughlyspeaking.
That’s an unknown unknown.
It’s like all of reality, all of the multiplelevels of reality that exist around you are
all of a sudden altered in an incomprehensiblemanner.
And then you could say that well, what happenedwas the alteration of that reality.
This is what happened.
It’s that you can only perceive it, essentially,as the explosion in the building and the consequent
collapse.
And so you might say that the Twin Towerswere brought down.
It’s like that’s such a low-resolutionrepresentation of what happened that it barely
begins to describe that event.
And so it’s that invisible background ofcomplex interrelationships, like a very, very
complex melody, that’s always going on aroundyou.
And as long as it works you don’t even noticeit.
What happens is that it manifests itself aspredictable and desirable order.
Which you can understand, and which is thereason we have predictable and desirable order.
This room is configured so that you can walkinto it without being afraid.
And what that means is that it’s a radicallysimplified version of reality.
You know, and you can see that, I mean, it’seven got padded walls, and that’s to stop
the sound bouncing so that it won’t annoyyou.
You know I mean it’s warm, it’s comfortable,it’s sort of neutral so it fades into the
background.
Everyone here is civilised beyond belief.
You hear about the radical individualism ofthe West…
I think of all the nonsense I’ve ever heardthat’s got to be the most nonsensical, we’re
so bloody obedient that it’s insane.
If you go to Edmonton at 3 o’clock in themorning and watch pedestrians, they will stop
at the ‘don’t walk’ light and wait untilit turns green [laughter].
Now the roads are wide and so they… butit’s still the case.
It’s like, really??
You think you’re an individual, really?
And I’m not complaining about it, I thinkit’s an amazing thing because you know we
can really zip cars through our cities becausepeople don’t run out into the middle of
the streets and get killed, they stay wherethey’re supposed to so it’s incredibly
efficient.
But we’re so obedient and well-behaved thatit’s beyond… if you think about us as
chimpanzees with clothes, you know, we’redoing pretty damn well.
And we set up our environments so that they’reso simplified that we never have to encounter
this multi-dimensional layered reality ofpatterns that’s just moving around us all
the time and that actually makes up reality.
That’s reality, that’s what the worldis made out of.
That’s a way different way of thinking aboutit than to think of the world as made up of,
say, of atoms.
Because you think, that way you just think,well it’s marbles in space, you know.
And of course atoms aren’t marbles, andeveryone knows that, like God only knows what
they are.
But that’s still the image, that’s stillthe metaphor, of reality.
But that’s not what reality is.
It’s an insanely patterned orchestra ofphenomena and that’s really what it is and
then what happens is that you’re in thislittle orderly sub-compartment in the middle.
It’s like, you’re in a box and the boxis in a box.
Well, let’s think about it.
You’re in a box, okay, this box is in abuilding, that’s a box.
The building is in the university, that’sa box.
The university is in the city, that’s abox.
The city is in the province, that’s a box.
Then it’s in Canada, then it’s coveredby the American nuclear umbrella, you know,
and then it’s embedded in this immense historyof individual rights and freedoms that have
manifested themselves as part of the politicaland economic order.
And all of that’s going on around you andpeople are working like mad, crazily, to keep
all of those boxes intact, and here you aresitting and thinking, well, what you see around
you is reality.
It’s like it is, yeah, but man, there’sa lot of people making this reality so simple
that you don’t have to think about it.
You can come in here and think about ideas,you know for like hours at a time, and you
don’t get eaten by a crocodile.
It’s really… and you know no one comesrunning through here pillaging, which is of
course… the crocodile eating and the pillagingwere very, very common occurrences in our
evolutionary history.
For lots of our ancestors going down to getwater from the local river was a life or death
mission.
I mean I can’t imagine having to get waterfrom a crocodile infested stream.
Especially when that’s where the lions arehanging out too, you know.
So, that’s order.
That’s the positive element of order.
Now you can say, students say this a lot:“oh my God, I’m so constrained within
these boxes, it’s destroying my individuality”you know.
And that’s the tyrannical…
I mean it’s pathetic in some sense, becauseGod, you’re so privileged it’s beyond
comprehension.
But having said that, it is also the case,and the case has to be made, that you do have
to sacrifice your potential to cultural norms.
And that is… you can argue that that’sdestructive.
And sometimes it is destructive.
Like creative people don’t fit very wellinto nested boxes.
And in order for them to fit they have todo damage in some sense to their psyches,
because they’re not naturally made to…that isn’t their natural environment, boxes
within boxes.
And so they might say, well I’m being oppressed.
It’s like, well of course you’re beingoppressed.
If you’re in fifty boxes that’s constrainyour freedom of movement, but maybe you should
be somewhat grateful for the fact that theboxes exist.
You think, well you don’t even notice them.
The boxes are so effective that you don’teven notice them.
You can even criticise them, and you should,you know, maybe they could be better and not
quite as rigid, and so forth.
And the criticism is justified but you haveto keep both of the representations in mind
at the same time, you know.
Your culture is the wise king and the despotat the same time.
And people hate that sort of thing because…and you know our rational minds and our history
of logical intellectual thinking has forcedus to assume that a thing can’t be itself
and its opposite at the same time.
But unfortunately when you’re talking aboutvery large-scale categories, things are what
they are and their opposite at the same time.
Because culture is the wise king and the tyrant,and that means it’s very difficult to adjust
your behaviour in relationship to it, becauseyou never know if you’re talking to the
wise king or the tyrant.
You know, and you feel that.
If you have to do your taxes or if you haveto deal with the university bureaucracy in
some way, it’s like, you’re a number,you know, and you’re just annoying, like
patients in the hospital, because hospitalswould run a lot better if they didn’t have
any patients in them, obviously.
And you know, you feel that, of course, wheneveryou’re in a very complex bureaucracy.
It’s like, you’re exchangeable, and that’svery annoying.
But by the same token, here you are.
So you have to criticise… this is also avery complex form of moral behaviour.
You have to criticise with gratitude.
And that’s something that students shouldreally be taught in university, because the
opposite of gratitude is resentment, and thereis nothing that’s more pathological than
resentment.
The only thing that comes close to resentment,in terms of its capacity to produce misery,
is arrogance, and those things are often…arrogance, resentment, and deceit… it’s
like that’s the evil triad.
You get all those three things going in yourlife and boy, you’re going to be in rough
shape very, very rapidly.
So then, let’s take a break, for fifteenminutes, okay?