Dave and I are here today to talk
 about Patreon, I'll start.
 We exchanged many emails
 with all the people in our business
 network and no one is happy with things
 which happen so we are
 think of other options and
 checked SubscribeStar but it seems
 that PayPal decided to stop funding them
 so the transition to an alternative platform,
 an alternative commercial platform that
 is out of our control, out of our control it doesn't make it sustainable,
 so Dave, why don't you explain what we talked about today.
 Yes, well I think so first
 it should be made clear to everyone how much
 is significant what happened to Carl
 Benjamin, Sargon of Akkad,
 it doesn't matter what you think of him or whether you agree with him or anything like that,
 but to ban him for something he did
 van Patreon's platform,
 which wasn't even on his channel,
 because of the word he said and used
 against the alternative right or neo-Nazis
 or whatever you want to call them,
 it is a huge shift in the boundaries of what is acceptable
 and now we can have various discussions and we have had them,
 where the boundaries should be and whether they should exist at all but
 is the fact that this man was thrown out just like that,
 no questions, no warnings,
 and this is just an extension
 everything we talked about.
 Also, given that
 that he did not violate Patreon's rules,
 the ones they set up and about which you are
 talked to Conte as well as about the fact
 that it won't happen and that Patreon didn't answer this well ...
 Well, look, Jack Conte came in
 my studio, in my house and said,
 he uttered a phrase I had never heard before,
 maybe you are, 'manifest observable behavior'
 you haven't heard this phrase before, have you?
 alone that this is just something I missed, well
 now of course 'manifest observable behavior, MOB mob (crowd), I think,
 that's it, how nice, but
 but the point is that it had to be
 regarding conduct and then in their Terms
 usage must also be related to something that is happening
 on the platform so it is on every border
 of what should be permissible Patreon scheduled and
 they put us in a position where, you know, I said,
 I called you last Saturday when this is
 it really took off and I told you to Patreon
 makes up about 65 to 70% of my income, I now have a firm
 with full-time, part-time employees,
 and I was actually thinking of deleting it right away,
 and no normal person would, no businessman
 I wouldn't do that and I took a lot of risks
 in the past, you know, before I was on Patreon
 I was on Ora TV with my producer and director,
 we all quit, lost health insurance, all that
 to get to Patreon means I like to take risks
 but then I realized, well, we need to have some plan
 and that’s actually why we do this. Well, we would go
 and faster but, well,
 i opened an account on SubscribeStar but I never did
 to the end adjusted in part because
 SubscribeStar seemed to start decaying almost immediately,
 they attacked them, and the same was not clear,
 I have read their Terms of Use and
 and it was not clear whether we would just go again
 find in an identical situation,
 and you can only make so many mistakes before
 but as these mistakes become fatal,
 so we came to one seriously and
 stable solution, I worked
 on it for months, literally months,
 I have been working on the system for six months now
 which will allow authors and
 to other people who publicly discuss intellectual topics
 to connect more efficiently
 with its readers, viewers,
 and listeners, and
 this week it occurred to me that, along with some
 change can be achieved
 exactly what we hope he can achieve
 so we'll try it
 do as quickly as possible, establish a system
 on a subscription model similar to Patreon's,
 there will be a lot of additional functionalities that I don't want to talk about now
 and I don't want to promise too much but the system is,
 because the system is new
 but we will try to run it
 as soon as possible,
 we have a lot of people who are interested,
 hypothetically interested in changing the platform
 for contribution payments. Dave and I.
 we plan to do this very seriously
 as soon as we find a smart way,
 so ... And you know, by the way,
 one of the interesting things we didn’t talk about
 but I guess we had similar experiences, the amount of emails
 which I received and of course tweets and everything else but
 mostly e-mails from developers, investors,
 ordinary people, engineers, I think
 everyone says that's it, because you know what the problems are
 with free speech,
 you don’t want to swing too soon, before you realize that
 the problem reached a critical mass, but then
 you will most likely swing too late, the lines will be like that
 far from being maybe out of it and that's why
 I think this is so interesting because, Carl
 is five or six years ago,
 when I started to see what was going on in the left and of course
 the whole thing about free speech, everyone told me you have to talk
 with Sargon of Akkad, it is the man who
 was a step ahead of all this ...
 Sargon was great and helped me a lot
 when they just started attacking me,
 you know he is a brave man, and
 what Patreon did to him was a real mistake
 And, like I said everyone in our network are strong
 upset about it, we exchange emails
 with some 30 to 40 people
 and, as Dave said earlier, we wanted to shoot this video today
 to inform all of you we are talking to, yes
 we haven't given up on this,
 indeed, people
 trying to find ways to stop this from happening as well
 and we have a good plan and
 we will try to implement it as soon as possible so
 I would ask all of you who are listening to this to be
 reasonably patient, I guess we'll need it
 about a week to a month
 to sort this all out, we'll do our best to finish something
 next week, hopefully before Christmas, and if
 we fail, it’s because
 with things like this they are always possible
 technical problems that arise unforeseen
 but I don't want you to have the impression that
 we take this lightly or retreat
 and not to look for a permanent one
 an alternative because we’re looking for it, and I think we can make it
 a better alternative and that is our plan.
 Yes, that’s exactly what I wanted to say, and I would add more
 that we were waiting for the right moment, you know,
 we watched this door slowly close for all of us,
 whether it's Twitter or Facebook,
 when they ban, when they secretly ban, the processing of earnings, and everything else
 and we take this very seriously, and of course
 you know that Jordan, who works harder than anyone else in this world,
 somehow managed and partly to build a platform
 during this year in spite of everything else.
 I knew, we knew this
 lurking in the background and will become a problem
 and Dave, you spent a lot of time talking to
 investors and developers o
 creating alternatives to these platforms that,
 they seem to be increasingly arbitrarily enacted
 advantage without any hesitation,
 but it is not easy. People want to
 to say something is enough now,
 and as i mentioned on the live stream the other day but
 I watched my Patreon collapse, I lost an eye
 600 sponsors, about $ 5,000 a month,
 but, surprisingly, that actually inspired me
 because I watched ... I agree ...
 Well on the one hand people send me
 emails and say they give up patronage and are annoyed,
 that it is not up to me and that they want to support me, on the other hand
 my business side tells me it's not good but
 you know we'll work it out ...
 I'm the same, I've lost a thousand subscribers and I feel the same way,
 as if telling Patreon to carry on
 and you know, it's not good for me financially
 sides although not some big one
 disaster currently, they are taking up
 for the right thing and encourage us,
 or let's say they encourage someone else to do something about it, so ...
 I like what you said, if you
 we can ask you to be reasonably patient, we are talking to
 to all possible people and some impossible ones,
 and we'll fix this, we will.
 Or at least we will give
 do our best to fix it, there will be some obstacles along the way
 because now we have to speed up this process
 so we will consider this a beta version but
 at least we hope to provide you with an easy way
 to switch to a new subscription service
 soon
 and thank you all for your patience,
 and constant support and attention
 and on your opinions
 and reactions to all this,
 we appreciate it a lot and I would say it helps us to
 we have motivation
 to continue working.
 You know, having all these subscribers on Patreon
 is certainly one of the reasons that
 I am trying to put this Youtube channel
 on, I wouldn't say first place, because he had to make room for
 this tour lectures, but is very high on the list of priorities.
 Sure, and it gives us a lot
 the flexibility to do various things also gave me the opportunity
 to join you on this tour and therefore I am
 incredibly honored and grateful to everyone ...
 Jordan, see you for
 a few days in West Palm Beach,
 and I'm taking you to dinner.
 Great,
 I found a good restaurant, I'm looking forward to meeting you ...
 Great, see you ... Because the tour
 we continue in California,
 three locations in California in January and
 then two in Australia and New Zealand,
 and we will add some more, I give myself to Seoul and
 Singapore, maybe the Philippines,
 we still have a lot of things planned ...
 Will there be anything on the moon?
 Well not yet but I know
 Elona Muska pa ...
 Good ...
 Talk to you soon and keep up the good content.
 Great. Hi.