Well, there were some things I wanted to tell you that were not finished yet
 in the previous lesson.
 The first was that I told you there are two game modes. But after that I only have
 one game type explained. So I know you've been itching to hear about that ever since.

 The first type of game we discussed was where everyone has a specific shared goal.

 You can consider that as a structured game.
 But the second type of game that Piaget was interested in was dramatic or "pretend" play.

 How "pretend" play generally works is ... a child can do it alone,
 but when it's teamwork, the kids usually come together,
 in a small group, and they put on a short play.
 It's like ... what would you call that?
 Spontaneous improvisation.
 Maybe they are imitating a family, and each gets a part,
 that would normally be "mom," "dad," and "baby,"
 and maybe "pet," dog or cat.
 "You are the cat, and you are the mother, and you are the father."
 And then they create a scene.
 Like a table with sheets, which children seem to like,
 and then they play the game.
 In a sense what they do is imitate their parents, or their pet,
 or the baby. But it's not exactly imitation, and that's important to note,
 because imitation implies ... if you imitate someone, what you do
 is copying what he just did.
 For example, there are robots nowadays,
 if you want to teach the robot to do something, maybe the robot has an arm, it has,
 you can take his arm and do this.
 And then if you put a can there, he'll do just that, exactly.
 So you teach him ... he has the ability to imitate movements he has performed before.

 But if you're a kid and you're reenacting a family, and you're the mother,
 then you do not copy the precise movements with your body
 that your mother made the last time you saw her, or looked at her.
 What you seem to be able to do instead is watch your mother for extended periods of time,
 and distill something you could describe as her "spirit."
 I know that's not really a psychological or scientific word, but it's a useful word,
 because ... you might say her "personality", but it's not exactly her personality,
 for it is her personality as a mother, which is not really her personality.
 It is the "mother personality," and that mother personality is something that has already been practiced
 by mothers from time immemorial.
 And what the child seems to do when, in this example, she looks at her mother,
 is distilling what is the spirit of motherhood and then embodying it.
 So you can think of the spirit of motherhood as those elements of behavior and perception
 and emotion and cognition, that too ... but all those things are embodied and simultaneously,
 the common elements of how a mother acts in different situations.
 So you can say, "That's 'mother-like' behavior." And who knows what that is.

 What you do is produce the stereotype of a mother, so to speak.
 People don't like stereotypes, especially in psychology, but almost everything
 what you think is in stereotypes. There is not much difference between a stereotype and a category.

 Categories are simplifications, and so are stereotypes.
 Either way, imagine the stereotype of a mother, and the child physically embodies that.

 What she's trying to do is become the mother.
 Why?
 That is abundantly clear.
 There are obvious reasons why someone does that.
 Because without mothers there would be no people. If we don't
 Having successful mothers, we would be finished, and we wouldn't be here
 to talk about it.
 What Piaget observed was that this kind of drama was extraordinary
 was important to children because that's how they learned how to act like them
 would be older children, would be teenagers,
 or young adults.
 It is a "test case" in a relatively safe environment.
 One of the things I've been thinking about ... It's not easy getting the role
 of the father, but I think one of the things that dads do,
 if they are good fathers is that they indicate a safe space
 in the house, or in the family environment, where the children can play undisturbed.
 Because play is also very sensitive behavior. By that I mean it's easy
 to disrupt children's play.
 If something is wrong with the child, it will not play.
 You can see that your child is doing well when it plays.
 You could say the same about your dog, or perhaps your partner.
 If he's in a particularly playful mood, there might not be a specific problem
 in the relationship, in the moment, and all needs in some way
 are more fundamental, are fulfilled.
 So in order for children to play properly, you must indicate a safe area where you can
 should take care of.
 And then they can experiment with different ways of being, and they do it on their own,
 but also in the company of other children.
 And of course what they do is practice for roles for later.
 You see these things in children in different ways, because
 they don't just play a parental role, that's a very common part of children's play,
 but they also get fixated on slightly older kids, maybe a year older,
 or two years older. Who then idolize, follow and imitate,
 even more direct than they would with a parent.
 The child has reasons for that, and the reason is that he
 tries to reach the next stage. So he scans the environment, looks for someone
 who seems to have succeeded, whatever that may be, who looks capable, and is friendly,
 and who tolerates a child following him. And he makes that other his own.
 So play, all the forms of play that we described, the two basic forms, are very
 important for children.
 And when you see how they "pretend," you have to realize that as a parent
 which is an extremely important form of activity, that's how they become
 socialized.
 Something else I didn't mention, this also has to do with Piaget ...
 We've talked about mythology and shamanic initiation lectures
 the idea that the development of the human personality is a point-by-point upward movement.
 So you move forward, and then you run into something in the way, some difficult obstacle,
 that you block, behaviorally. Because of which you cannot achieve your goal
 based on your current behavioral plans. Or it's more complex than that, and it disrupts
 the entire structure you use to integrate your behavior over time.
 The difference between the two is like the difference between
 coming home to your partner, or going out with your partner, if people still do,
 going out with your partner while he is in a bad mood.
 So you smile at him or tell a joke
 but you don't get a response, or he reacts in an angry way. You will orient yourself accordingly,
 things will sort of fall apart because of that. You may say, "The whole evening is ruined."

 You probably aren't saying, "The whole relationship is over." But if that happens often enough
 maybe.
 You may say, "The whole evening is ruined." How likely
 is a somewhat exaggerated response, so direct.
 My impression as a clinical psychologist is that when people are difficult to get along with,
 you have to make them do it three times while you keep an eye on it. 'Cause when they do it the third time
 can you say, "See, you did this.
 This is what you do. "
 And they say, "No, I don't." And you say:
 "Yes, because I saw you do it then, and then, and then."
 And then they are the cigar, you immediately win if you do.
 But seriously, if it's just one incident, you better let it go.
 You don't have any real proof, and maybe there's just something small going on.

 Three times, that is quite different. 'Cause then you have some credibility
 and that's a good balance between reacting too impulsively ... because
 you have to stand up for yourself, right?
 Does that mean you have to respond to every little thing?
 You will respond all the time if you do, however you want
 not being a doormat, and let people walk all over you.
 So you have to find a balance between being tolerant so you don't have an unnecessary struggle,
 and be tough so you don't have an unnecessary struggle. And three is a good number.

 Anyway you're out with your partner and he's annoying
 and you can reconstruct your behavior.
 Instead of telling jokes, look at your phone and let it calm down, or something like that.

 You have not changed much in the interpretation framework with which you shape the interaction.
 The evening is still going as planned, you can still use it
 of the perceptual structures and the expectations that guided you.
 They are resized to a very high resolution, in a small way.
 That will upset you a bit, because you will think:
 "What is going on?"
 You might think, "Is something wrong with me?" If you doubt yourself
 will you do that. Or maybe you think there is something wrong with him.
 Whatever.
 But it is not that serious.
 But maybe you're out with your partner and someone comes
 you are in a restaurant, someone comes to the table and says "hello"
 against your partner.
 "I didn't know you had a boyfriend or girlfriend.
 You didn't tell me that when we went out last week. "
 That's a completely different scenario.
 Yeah, and you laugh about it because you know very well that that's a different story.

 And you can ask, "Why does one scenario disturb more than another?"
 And the answer is something like, if you make assumptions about the world
 Are hierarchically ordered, meaning the small actions you perform
 are at the bottom of the hierarchy, that's the micro details, then
 abstract up, all the way to the top, which might be, "I'm in a faithful relationship."
 There are hierarchical levels of being in a faithful relationship
 to the small actions you undertake together. The higher
 you have to go in the hierarchy, the higher the disturbance takes place in the hierarchy,
 the more upset you will be.
 So an irritable partner, you can still avoid that, but an unfaithful partner,
 that's about the top of the hierarchy, which makes you rethink
 your past, your present, and your future, and who you are, and who he is,
 and how men are, and how women are, that is really disastrous.
 Everything falls apart.
 That's the journey to the underworld we've been talking about.
 Piaget had a similar idea with regard to children, as his stage theory
 is a point-by-point theory.
 What he noticed in children was that they were constructing a structure,
 and a structure is ... I think you can best consider it as a personality.
 Because a personality has thoughts, and feelings, and motivations, and actions, it's all those things
 at the same time.
 It is a living "sub-element" within you, and children produce such sub-elements
 of themselves, which are functional, while "building" themselves from
 their motor systems, and occasionally they encounter a situation where the tools
 they've built, the "sub-personalities" they've built, not the desired one
 having effect.
 That might happen when a three-year-old goes to daycare
 and don't make friends.
 And that will ... a child will come home and cry, collapse,
 and maybe be angry, and tell his parents, "Nobody wanted to play with me."
 They will burst into tears.
 It's almost like they are switching from a domain where they are proficient ...
 feelings, especially negative feelings, indicate that you have passed from
 the domain where you are competent, to the domain where you are not competent.
 And when you cry, it is often a sign of distress.
 Sometimes it is anger, but often it is a sign of distress, and it means:
 “I have found myself in a situation where what I know is no longer sufficient to achieve the desired
 produce results.
 So you cry, and then you get help.
 People come and ask, "What's going on?" And they pat you on the back.
 They comfort you, and they may help you strategize what you should
 can do to improve the situation, or how you could act.
 Or if you're a smart parent, you might be playing with your child and offering him ...
 you improve his social skills.
 Or you let him play with others more often and keep an eye on his behavior,
 and helps him to reconstruct his little sub-personality, integrate more information,
 so that it becomes more refined.
 That's the Piagetian ... this is a combination of the Piagetian ideas of the
 stage theory, a pointwise upward movement, and that's the confusion
 because the previous structure is no longer well attuned to the world, as well as the idea of
 assimilation and accommodation.
 Piaget turned assimilation and accommodation into opposites in a sense, and it's not exactly ....
 It is difficult to determine.
 But assimilation is for Piaget when you take in information, and the structure,
 the inner structure it comes into doesn't really need to change much.

 And accommodation is when you take in significant "piece" of information, often negative,
 and it is so disruptive that the structure you use to understand the information
 must be reconstructed.
 Piaget sees it as either assimilation or accommodation, but I think it's easier to see
 as a continuum, assimilation taking place at the level of "micro-behavior" ...
 When you try to pick up a fork and your hand is numb
 you try to pick up a fork, and it doesn't work, several times, then you change grip
 and picks him up.
 That is somewhat annoying.
 You will look at the fork, and you will try some routines to pick it up,
 but that won't collapse your whole world.
 But if you find a dead mouse in your soup, it will be a whole different story.
 That is again a matter of hierarchy.
 So at the bottom of the motor structures, I think it is easy to assimilate,
 you only have to make small changes in the ... I consider them as maps,
 cards or personalities.
 I know those two don't seem the same, but they are very similar.
 It depends on whether the thing needs a little adjustment or if you have to throw the whole thing away
 and build something new.
 It's the difference between tightening your car's lock bolts and buying a new car.
 You can think of levels of ... you can think of it as levels of complexity.
 Another way to look at it ... you have to know this because you have to understand
 how you determine how upset you should be when something goes wrong.
 That is a very complicated question.
 If you wake up with a pain in your side, how upset must you be?
 You do not know.
 Maybe it's nothing, maybe you'll die of cancer in six months.
 You do not know.
 So it's not obvious how people adjust their emotions, when something goes wrong,
 for the scope of what went wrong is not clear.
 Your partner is crabby when you go out to dinner.
 Does that mean you're going to split up in two weeks?
 Maybe.
 So why not go crazy because your world is collapsing?
 Some people do, they are people with more negative emotions,
 who score higher on the trait "neuroticism."
 Because they are more likely to respond as if a small, potentially small, anomaly,
 whether something uncertain, or a threat, or discontinuity, or an unexpected event, is catastrophic.
 While with an emotionally stable person ... you may have to say, "I break up,"
 before they get upset, and even then they might not
 too much.
 So you think of the motor hierarchy, of micro-behavior at the bottom
 to abstractions at the top, and then you can understand how to estimate
 how upset you get when something goes wrong.
 Suppose it is small to begin with.
 Check it at that level.
 If you can't fix it at that level, then level up.
 If your car doesn't work, you don't buy a new one right away.
 The first thing you do is see if the battery is empty, because that's what you
 can do, and what causes you the least amount of trouble.
 And that's a very good guide to mental hygiene.
 It's like Ockham's razor.
 You know Ockham's razor from science, right?
 Does anyone know what Ockham's razor is?
 How many people know what Ockham's razor is?
 How many people don't know?
 Oh, that's amazing.
 Astonishing.
 You should know.
 It's a shame you don't know.
 No doubt that is not your fault.
 Either way, Ockham's razor is a phrase that refers to a principle that was established
 by an old thinker named Ockham, who said, "Don't multiply your statements more than necessary."

 What he meant was: if you have six reasons why something went wrong,
 and you can rank them according to their complexity, choose the simplest one,
 and stay with it until it is disproved, and then take your next simplest one, et cetera.
 It is often used as a guide in science where the idea is: if you
 have a simple explanation, don't complicate it with unnecessary assumptions.
 It may also indicate a deeper underlying truth, namely that it is unlikely
 that a collection of entities forms a specific constellation, but that it is extremely unlikely
 that they form an improbable and complex constellation.
 Either way, hopefully that's understandable.
 You can weave all those ideas together.
 At the bottom of the hierarchy of your personality are actions, at the top are abstractions,
 moral abstractions, such as, "Be a good person."
 When you encounter something unexpected, the degree to which you get upset is proportional to it
 the level in the hierarchy where the damage appears to have occurred.
 You have to guess that somewhat, and you do that partly with your temperament,
 so if you are highly neurotic, you are gambling "catastrophe," and if you are not very neurotic, you are gambling "irrelevant."
 And you do that in part because of the way you
 perceives your own skill. Because when you have smaller and bigger problems in the past
 even if you are a nervous type, and you have worked it out, you may have learned:
 "Yes, that's a problem, but I can troubleshoot so it's not really a problem."
 That's a good way to see yourself.
 That's much better than seeing yourself as, "I'm a problem-free person."

 Yes, good luck with that.
 But, "I'm a person who can deal with problems if I focus on them,"
 that is very useful.
 And the other way your nervous system decides how to get upset
 if something happens is by looking at how other people treat you.
 And if they treat you as someone who is competent, your nervous system becomes less neurotic.
 That's a good way to see it.
 You produce more serotonin, you react less generally to error indications.
 All right, Piaget is talking about assimilation.
 Assimilation is when you have to make a little change, and accommodation is like the whole structure
 needs to be reconfigured. And he saw that as different
 ways of learning, but that is not the case. They are on a continuum, from very simple
 to very complex.
 Have you ever heard of the idea of ​​a paradigm shift?
 How many of you have heard about that?
 How many not?
 Do you know the name "Thomas Kuhn"?
 Somebody?
 No ... well, Thomas Kuhn was a philosopher of science, and he wrote a book in 1962 entitled
 "The Structure of Scientific Revolutions." And in fact Kuhn said the same about it
 the way knowledge structures develop, like what Piaget said about the development of the knowledge structures
 in an individual.
 Kuhn was concerned with major transformations in the scientific perspective.
 For example, at the end of the 1890s, physicists were convinced
 they could close down the whole enterprise.
 Why?
 Because the physicists knew everything there was to know.
 There was not a single phenomenon that physicists, at the time, could not explain.
 Except for one, and this is the phenomenon they couldn't explain.
 Imagine you're on a train, and it's heading that way, at half the speed of light.
 And you shine with a flashlight, you are on the train (protected from the wind of course),
 and you shine light going that way. And you measure the speed of light
 that comes out of your flashlight.
 The speed of light is 300,000 kilometers per second, from your flashlight.
 Okay, now you're on the ground, watching that train go by.
 And someone on the train shines a flashlight, and a light comes out,
 and you measure the speed of that.
 What is the speed?
 You may think, "It's the speed of light plus half the speed of light,
 for the train travels at half the speed of light, and the light travels at the speed of light.

 So the light of the train and lamp combination is the speed of light
 plus half the speed of light. That's what would happen if someone threw a ball. ”

 But that is incorrect.
 What happens is that it is the speed of light. No matter how fast you go if you
 With your flashlight shining, the light from your flashlight will
 go exactly 300,000 kilometers per second.
 300,000 kilometers per second.
 It won't be anymore.

 So when you're on the train, and you step back, and you shine the lamp,
 and someone measures it, is it not the speed of light minus half the speed of light.
 Which would be if you were throwing a ball.
 It's the speed of light.
 No one could explain that.
 That was incomprehensible, but everyone ignored it.
 It turns out you can't ignore that, and that wasn't the only thing wrong
 was mapped at the end of the nineteenth century from physics,
 but it was an important point.
 And to solve that, Newtonian physics had to be completely overthrown, and replaced with
 quantum physics.
 Quantum physics is ... you can think of quantum physics as such a box,
 containing a box for Newtonian physics.
 So quantum physics can explain anything that Newtonian physics can explain,
 but besides that, it explains a number of other things. And you can say that it is therefore a better theory.

 I can say, "You have just gone through a personal transformation.
 Are you a better person compared to before? ”And you may say,“ How would you
 be able to judge something like that? "
 I would say, "If you have a better personality, you can do anything you
 before that it could, just as well, or maybe a little better, and there are a number of them
 new things you can do.
 That's a better personality. "
 That's an interesting example of how the idea of ​​"better," which is an ethical idea,
 better versus worse ... you can conceptualize it. This is one of the things
 which Piaget is very useful for, because he gives you a language,
 anchored in observation and science, to approach questions bordering on the moral.

 So a better personality can do more than the previous personality could, and you can certainly see
 how that applies to your life.
 On that basis, I would suggest ... people compare themselves
 always with other people. And what you generally do is compare yourself to ...
 you create a small social hierarchy of the people around you.
 That's a very irritating tendency, because it means no matter how successful you are
 in your life, you are always at the center of the social hierarchy.
 So you end up ... I know a lot ...
 you might become a president of a company worth a hundred million dollars.
 Then you deal with a number of directors, and there are ten of them.
 Three of them are directors of a company worth two billion.
 Compared to those people you are a small director. But who are you going with
 compare yourself?
 With the people who clean up your mess?
 No.
 You could, but you don't. You have a small group around you, and you are somewhere in the middle.

 That is useful to know, because it means that you have to learn to cope
 with the fact that you are somewhere in the middle.
 And you might say, "How do you deal with that? Cause you gotta get better,
 and you have to be very good at something. "
 I think the best way to do that, especially when you're older,
 cannot be compared to other people by yourself. You compare yourself to the previous version of yourself.

 That's a good way to check, because certainly by the time you're thirty ...
 when you are young you have to compare yourself to other people because when you are young
 you look a lot like all other young people. But by the time you're thirty or older,
 you no longer resemble other people at all.
 Because the circumstances of your life are starting to become so unique and specific.

 Comparing yourself with others doesn't really help, but comparing yourself
 Who you were with before, that is very helpful, and you can continue to do that throughout your life.
 And it's fair game because the previous "you" had all the problems and all the chances
 and positive qualities that you have.
 It's fair game, and it will save you a lot of trouble.
 Well, Piaget described different games, and he talked about different ways
 on which they help in socialization.
 I'm using this "meta-idea," the hierarchy of the personality,
 to explain that.
 From a Piagetian perspective you "build yourself up" from your body, towards more and more abstraction.
 And while you do that, you can do more and more things with your body, but you can too
 doing increasingly complex things, integrating the different things you do with your body over time,
 and with more and more people.
 Piaget has a very cool idea of ​​what constitutes morality, as a consequence of that.

 Let's say you can choose game A or game B.
 And you might say, "I want to know which game is better, A or B.
 Because if I'm going to play a game, it better be a better game. "
 And he would say, "Well, this is how you can find out the game you're playing
 is a good game. It's good for you.
 Now.
 It's good for you now, next week, next month, next year, and ten years from now.
 So not only is it good for you now, but if you play it repeatedly, things get better for you. ”

 That is a game in which you take the future into account.
 It's not an impulsive game.
 Cocaine is very good for people, for a day, but for a week,
 or six months, or five years, it is a game that weakens.
 And you can't use your gut to determine that, because cocaine is fulfilling
 the person using it usually with a sense of strength and potential.
 So you cannot rely on your gut, no more than when you are tempted
 to do something that is impulsive and fun, but that can have negative consequences.
 So the game must be good now, and in the future.
 Then it must be good for you, and for your family,
 and for your social community, et cetera, in a concentric movement.
 And it has to be good for all of those things over long periods of time.
 Piaget called that a "balanced game."
 There is another idea behind the idea of ​​a balanced game, namely that
 if I play a game that's good for me, and good for you, and for you, and for you,
 then we'll all probably be willing to play it
 voluntarily.
 That's also why Piaget believed that a game structure, such as a social structure ...
 that if everyone plays because they want to, is much better than a game structure
 in which everyone plays because they have to.
 He would say that's partly the technical difference between a dictatorship
 and a democracy.
 That is very intelligent.
 I think Piaget got further with that idea than anyone else in history.
 Because you can understand ... there is an old idea ...

 Van Hume, another philosopher.

 What is his first name?


 What?
 David. Yes, you would think I could remember that.
 David Hume.
 He feels that you cannot derive an "imperative" from an "indicative."
 That's another such principle, like Ockham's razor, and it means
 something like, no matter how much you know about something, that doesn't mean that
 you know what to do with it.
 An example. Let's say we know AIDS is a problem, cancer is a problem,
 that heart disease is a problem, that poverty is a problem,
 etcetera. There are all kinds of problems.
 How do you determine how to distribute resources for those different problems?
 That's a difficult problem to approach scientifically,
 and that's because there are many variables to weigh.

 Imagine you are making a table and you think, "Okay, what's the most problematic,
 that we can solve with the smallest amount of money? "

 The problem with determining if something is problematic is still you
 must make a value judgment.
 You cannot possibly get to the root of the problem without the problem
 of value judgments. And that is why it is very difficult to
 determine an imperative (what to do), based on an indicative (what you know).
 And therefore there is a distinction between science and morality, or science and religion,
 that's another way of seeing it. They are different domains.
 Piaget has, in a sense, described a solution to that, because he says:
 "See, a theory is better than a previous one, if the theory explains the same thing,
 and more. "And you can apply that to your personality. And a game that is better than
 another game, is a game that you and other people benefit from, during
 longer periods.
 Such a game is difficult to calculate.
 When people talk about the environment and sustainability, they are in fact
 about a Piagetian balanced game. Where you can live in your family, and your family
 in a society, and society can function within an economy, and the economy can exist within
 an ecology, without the economy unbalancing the ecology. That you couldn't live
 and your family wouldn't, and society wouldn't function, and the economy wouldn't function.

 So there is this idea of ​​a layered equilibrium, but such things are very difficult to calculate.

 But it is a nice principle.
 So if you think ... if you need a justification for doing what
 and you want to have a solid moral foundation, which is very useful,
 because then people can't knock you over, verbally, intellectually, or whatever.
 Because you are anchored, you are on solid ground.
 You should know: why is this good for you, if you were to take good care of yourself?

 Why is it good for you over a longer period of time?
 How will your family benefit?
 How does society benefit?
 And from there you can keep going up.
 I can give you an example of someone who does that, in my opinion.
 Do you know that Dutch guy who invented how to get plastic out of the ocean?
 He is not complaining about it, and is not parading with a sign that says:
 "I don't like pollution."
 As if you had to tell people that, because nobody likes ...
 "I don't like pollution and I am against poverty."
 Yes ... try to find someone who is for pollution and poverty.
 This boy was seventeen, something like that, and he was diving.
 He is a diver.
 I think he was spearfishing, and he noticed there was more plastic than fish.
 And that was not a happy discovery for him.
 He started to think about it, "How can we get the plastic out of the ocean?"
 Later he was looking at manta rays, and manta rays have large wings with which
 they float through the sea.
 And he thought about that for a while, and then he thought, "Maybe I can build something
 what looks like a giant manta, which lies on the surface of the ocean like a triangle,
 and can be towed through the ocean so that all the plastic gets into the tip of the triangle.
 And then you can just brag it. "
 But then he calculated it ... I don't know the story exactly, but this is about it.

 He made some calculations and found that it wouldn't be effective.
 because it takes a lot of energy to pull that thing through the water, and there is a lot of water.
 And you produce a lot of pollution if you pull that thing through the water.

 So that probably won't help.
 But then he realized that when you go far out into the ocean, there are big ring-shaped ones
 sea ​​currents are like big hurricanes of water that move very slowly.

 But they are huge, they are the size of a continent.
 The oceans have always been in motion, so he thought, "Aha!
 As the ocean moves, so does the plastic collector
 not to be dragged through the water.
 You can attach it to the bottom of the ocean with cables, and it just stays there.
 And then the ocean will pass through by itself. "
 So he built a prototype, not too big, and he collected quite a bit of plastic.
 All the plastic is in the top thirty centimeters, by the way, and the density increases
 as you get closer to the top inches.
 Then he built a bigger one, and subscribed to "Kickstarter"
 and raised so much money.
 Then he had a number of engineers evaluate his idea, and they said:
 "This probably works."
 So then they built a larger specimen several kilometers long, which has now been placed
 off the coast of Japan.
 They also sent a whole fleet of people from California to Hawaii for an estimate
 to make up the amount of waste in the water. Because there is a big place
 in the middle of the Pacific called the "floating garbage dump,"
 or the "plastic soup"?
 It doesn't matter ... it's full of plastic.
 They went to estimate how much was there.
 Anyway, he thinks he can fix that thing in the bottom of the ocean, in those great ocean currents,
 can make it a hundred kilometers in size, in a V-shape, with a collection point at the end,
 load all the plastic he collects onto towing vessels and refine it into oil or plastic,
 and pay for it while he does it.
 You can visit him, I think he's nineteen or twenty now.
 That's a well-balanced game, isn't it?
 That works well.
 He makes some money, good for him. He can hire a number of people, that's good.
 Everyone is happy with it, because we come from
 the waste. And it has no downside.
 It's hard to argue why
 wouldn't be right.
 And it is good because it benefits everyone, including at the higher levels.
 So that's a balanced state.
 It's a very intelligent idea.
 Good, Jung.
 Experimental psychologists don't like Jung ... they don't like Freud either,
 they generally have little time for clinicians.
 But that doesn't matter, they don't try to solve the same problems.
 Usually when you take classes in "personality theory", you treat Freud before you treat Jung.
 That's because Freud preceded Jung in a number of ways, historically,
 and many people, especially the Freudians, like to see Jung as a student of Freud.
 There is something in it, because Freud was the first person to do
 collected ideas about the unconscious, and conceptualized, published, and applied them to
 the problems of pathology and mental health.
 Chapeau.
 And Freud was unsurpassed in describing pathological families, and there are plenty of them.
 But Jung was interested in something underneath.
 Freud already had a great eye for what lies on the surface.
 He was one of the first to point out the strength of sexual and aggressive motives
 in shaping the way we think.
 But Jung was more interested in ... in a way, Jung was more like a Darwinian biologist.

 He was more interested in biological and psychological philosophical history
 of basic human behavioral patterns.
 Jung was not like a behaviorist.
 A behaviorist thinks that when you are born, there is nothing beyond the ability
 to learn things, you are a blank slate.
 And everything you learn is a result of sensory information you receive,
 and what you learn from it.
 But Jung thought completely different.
 He thought there is a specific human nature, and he tried to understand
 what that human nature is.
 A few lectures ago I talked about the possible elements from which
 the world in which you live exists.
 You can distinguish the "completely unknown". The unknown that is so unknown
 that you don't even know it's there.
 That is something very shocking if you ever come across it.
 That's what you're exposed to, hypothetically, when you go to a horror movie that revolves around fear.

 Because horror movies that use fear confront you with things that don't behave
 as they should behave, like inanimate objects moving.
 If you suddenly discover an inanimate object moving,
 there is a lot wrong with your current model of the world.
 You can experience that somewhat in a horror film, because objects do things,
 they shouldn't do, like walls that bleed.
 That's not supposed to happen, and that's why it's disturbing to see something like this.

 But you expose yourself to that with horror movies to ...
 you try to develop some courage, because who knows which of your basic assumptions
 will not turn out to be correct.
 So we were talking about representations of the completely unknown, and I indicated that those
 often associated with snake-like predators. And then we talked about representations of culture,
 because every character has to deal with the culture, be it a fictional character,
 or you yourself.
 You're stuck with it.
 You have your culture, and that's partly positive. 'Cause here you are you can talk
 you can read, it is warm, a bright future awaits you.
 But it is also a destructive tyrant because it is ruining the world and all that stuff
 that you already know.
 That's culture, and then there's nature. Because you are also stuck with that.
 And there is a benign element of nature, which is usually represented by feminine symbols,
 and that is "Mother Nature" that the environmentalists know and love.
 And there's Mother Nature giving your mom cancer when she's forty, and that's the downside
 Mother Nature, and you're stuck with that too.
 And you are there, with all your useful aspects,
 your heroic aspects.
 Technically speaking. The aspects of you that are able to confront the unknown
 and overcome, or face the tyrannical part of the culture and overcome.
 That's the positive part, and there's the negative part, that part of you
 that you know very well, that always causes problems for yourself and others.
 That doesn't do what it should, and is spiteful, and angry, petty, mean,
 ignorant, blind, impulsive, that rationalizes, and all that fine stuff
 what people are capable of.
 These are all archetypes.
 They are archetypes because they are the basic personalities that we use
 to orient ourselves in life.
 I think that's the best way to see it.
 When Jung talked about an archetype, it's complicated because sometimes he talked about them
 as instincts, sometimes as images, and sometimes
 like stories.
 But the best way to deal with that is to understand that they all do
 at the same time.
 For example, if you go to a romantic story, which is some kind of archetypal story,
 you go to a romantic comedy, that means the main characters get into a love affair,
 and it ends positively.
 Romantic Comedy: An Archetypal Structure.
 What are the characters doing?
 They are driven by their instinct, of course, which is the instinctual level of the archetype.
 Then it is a pattern of behavior, because they interact with each other.
 And it's a story because someone has selected the main elements of the events,
 in the way that would be most engaging to an audience, and displayed it.
 So the archetype can be all of those things at the same time.
 That is not contradictory, it just means that it is a very complex phenomenon.
 You can see it best as a personality.
 An archetype is a personality, and an archetypal story is the way one
 archetypal personality manifests itself over time.
 And there are many archetypal stories, I can give you some basic examples.

 The basic archetype for masculine behavior is the story of the dragon, confronting the dragon.
 Going out, confronting the dragon, which could be anything.
 It could be the completely unknown, it could be the negative element of the feminine, that's a dragon that
 men are constantly paralyzed, and what usually happens as a result, is that
 the person gets a treasure, or a girl.
 The basic feminine archetype, insofar as I've been able to discover it ...
 it's a bit harder to figure out, it took me a long time ... is "Beauty and the Beast."
 I found out ... for several reasons, but I only got there
 two years ago, and I thought, "Of course, that's it."
 I read a book by the people who did data analysis for Google, and it's called "A Billion Wicked Thoughts."

 It's a pretty interesting book, and what it basically is is an investigation into the use of the search engine.

 I think 18-19 percent of search engine use is sexual in nature.
 And then you think, "What do men do, and what do women do?"
 We know what men do, they look at pictures of naked women, generally.
 What do women do?

 Ah!
 They don't look at pictures of naked men, they read about sex.
 So pornography for women is literary.
 So I thought, "That's interesting."
 That makes sense, because women read more fiction than men.
 Women are more likely to read fiction.
 Women seem to be more interested in people than things, a gender difference that is not culture-bound.

 So women read about sex.
 You know that when you ... when you look at ... when I was on summer vacation as a kid,
 my mother always took about thirty doctor novels with her.
 Do you know what a doctor's novel is?
 Does anyone know what a doctor's novel is?
 Does anyone not know?
 Okay, most people know?
 It's a cheap romantic story.
 A sympathetic young woman meets a flashy, but somewhat distant man. And he's already got someone
 but she doesn't deserve it. And then she seduces him
 and he decides she's actually the one. And then she gets it
 and everyone lives happily ever after.
 That's a doctor's fiction.
 The original doctor's novel, millions of it published,
 went like this, it was a pretty flat, third-rate story.
 But since the 1970s, the doctor's novel has exploded, and of a third-rate story
 as I told you, turned into very pornographic versions of it.
 They are very popular, and stories like that are also characteristic of female internet use.

 You see they look up "Beauty and the Beast" stories, and there are five main protagonists.
 And I find this so terribly comical,
 I was double when I first read it.
 These are the five main men in female heavy pornography: werewolf, vampire,
 surgeon, millionaire,
 pirate.
 Isn't that entertaining? I was double. It's not much different in a way
 the masculine archetypal story of the confrontation with the dragon.
 I'm going to show you something from Sleeping Beauty, which makes that very clear.
 I'll show you that today.
 Because when you think about it, these are actually kind of bad guys.
 The werewolf and the vampire in particular, but the pirate is actually one of them.
 And you may ask, "Why would such men have that role in feminine archetypal sexual narratives?"
 And the answer is: what good is a man
 which cannot be dangerous?
 Think about that.
 This theme is constantly portrayed in romantic comedies.

 There is a girl and she has a boyfriend.
 A young man.
 He's the kind of boy who never grew up.
 Usually he's ...
 What is his name? A comedian ...
 Seth Rogen. Usually he's some sort of Seth Rogen.
 And he's jovial, and funny, and her friend,
 but actually he wants to sleep with her, and she knows it.
 She knows he's not just a friend, and he's not just a friend, he's pretending.

 And then there's the guy she's interested in who doesn't look like Seth Rogen,
 and which has a raw edge.
 And the story usually unfolds ... there is a development taking place between those three characters.
 And the "Seth Rogen" character always says, "Why doesn't she like me?"

 And the answer is: you only have to look at him for ten minutes and you know why.
 Partly because she doesn't want a boyfriend.
 She wants someone who is good for something and someone who is good for something
 is someone with a raw edge.
 And what happens in the feminine archetype is that the woman civilizes that,
 at least in relation to itself.
 I don't think that's very different from the
 male hero myth.
 I'm going to show you something from Sleeping Beauty first.

 Have a look.
 What is the universal "video player"?
 Yes that one.
 Thank you.
 I have to download it because they clean this machine every night.
 So you have to download things over and over again.
 Okay, let's talk about Sleeping Beauty's structure for a moment.
 There's a king, and a queen, and they live in a kingdom, logically.
 They are trying to have a child, but that does not really work.
 After a while they suddenly have a girl
 called Aurora.
 That's a reference to the sky.
 You often see that archetypal figures are associated with
 cosmic phenomena.
 For example, kings and queens have a crown.
 And divine figures have halos.
 There is not much difference between a crown and a halo, and the crown is the sun.
 The little dots on it are the rays of the sun.
 Or it's the moon.
 It depends on whether the crown is made of gold or silver, because gold is a solar metal
 and silver is lunar metal.
 So if something is connected to the cosmos, that means it has changed
 from the purely personal, to the impersonal, or transpersonal, or archetypal.
 The archetypal would not be your father, but the Father as such, the spirit of the Father.
 Not your mother, but the mind of the Mother as such.
 If you have the king and queen, you have the sun and the moon.
 You have the prince of the sky of the day, and the prince of the sky of the night.
 You have the frost of all that touches the light, and you have the transpersonal figures
 from Mother and Father.
 You see this in many movies, hero stories, and comic books.
 The most common pattern portrayed is that the hero has two pairs of parents.
 Harry Potter has the Dursley family, where he has to live under the stairs,
 and he has his brother ...
 "cousin." What is his name?

 What?

 Dudley!
 Yes, the long version of "dud." (blank)
 And he's a bad brother, they are the archetypal enemy brothers.

 Harry Potter.
 Hero and opponent.
 And he has his common parents, and those are the very common parents.
 They live in an English suburb, and they are very conservative
 and narrow-minded.
 They don't want anything to do with magic.
 In addition, he has his heavenly parents, his magical parents.
 And they occasionally appear as a ghost, over the course of the movie, when he really needs them.

 Superman, he has his earthly parents and his heavenly parents.
 If you look up "be hero" on Wikipedia, I think you have about a hundred and sixty
 listed, the same motif, over and over again.
 The reason for that is ... first, if you're a teenager, you think:
 "Are these really my parents?"
 And the answer is yes and no.
 Yes, because they are from a strict, direct biological perspective
 are your parents.
 But from an archetypal perspective, you have parents to
 3.5 billion ago.
 Your parents were only the last in a very long line of parents.
 The reason you call your daddy "daddy" or "daddy," or whatever you call him,
 is because of the recognition that the relationship you have with him,
 in a sense is not personal, but archetypal.
 He is the Father.
 He has that role for you.
 And you can even know when he plays that role well, because you tell
 your friends maybe, "I don't have a good father."
 How do you know that?
 You have an idea of ​​what a good dad would be
 and if he doesn't, he isn't.
 Your childish and adolescent misinterpretations aside.
 "I have a terrible mother."
 Compared to what?
 "Compared to the ideal mother."
 You may ask, "Who is that ideal mother?"
 You see it incessantly in religious representations.
 For example, in Christianity, she is represented as the Virgin Mary,
 the perfect mother.
 That is why she is a holy figure.
 She is a holy figure, an archetypal figure, as every society
 that does not worship the mother and child disappears.
 It must be sacred, because everyone starts ... everyone has that relationship. And as society
 that doesn't support and appreciate well, then there is something
 seriously wrong with society.
 All right, Sleeping Beauty.
 King and queen.
 Child.
 So we have the triad of the family.
 Then they decide to baptize her, they're going to give her a name,
 and that is when she becomes an individual.
 And they make a mistake when they baptize her.
 What's the mistake?
 Do you still remember?
 How many of you have seen Sleeping Beauty?
 Okay, and how much not?
 Well, from those who haven't seen it, have you seen any other Disney movies?
 Have you seen any other Disney movies?

 The lionking.
 Good, and other?

 Is there anyone here who has never seen a Disney cartoon?
 Good.
 You see how much there was no one as far as I could see
 how much those stories are spread in the culture, even if they are
 very old stories. Even in film form, they are quite old.
 The mistake they make is they don't invite the evil queen to baptism.
 And that is Maleficent.
 That clearly has a satanic undertone, and you know it, because
 she wears black horns, and she has a cloak that is on fire.

 You can tell she is an evil person.
 She is an archetype. She is the archetype of the negative feminine.
 It's a very thoughtful story.
 You think, "Why would you invite something like that to your daughter's baptism?
 Especially since you've been waiting for her for a long time, and she's a real princess, and everything is perfect. "

 Well, a different story.
 This is another archetypal story.
 There are children, and their mother ... their father wants a divorce,
 whether his wife dies, or whatever.
 He gets a new wife, and she decides she doesn't like those kids very much.

 And that happens a lot, by the way.
 If you have a stepparent, you are a hundred times more likely to be physically abused.
 That is the biggest risk factor.
 Along with having an alcoholic as a parent.
 An unpleasant bit of statistics.
 It's hard enough to tolerate kids, but when they're someone else's kids
 it is even more difficult.
 That's a Freudian observation, and that's no joke.
 People are not that friendly, and there is terrible jealousy.
 When a husband and wife start dating, and the wife has kids,
 and the man is jealous, and the children get in the way, especially when they annoy him too,
 because they might not be happy that he's not their real dad,
 maybe he's just a creep, you don't know ... the tension that can arise in such a situation,
 can quickly become completely unbearable, and last indefinitely.
 So she says to her new husband, "Take those damn kids to the woods,
 and try to leave them there. ”He's not happy about that, but he's under a spell
 from his new wife, and not very smart, and a little bad too.

 So he takes the children to the forest and leaves them there.
 That sucks for the kids.
 They're in the wilderness, as you may feel when your mother dies,
 and your father marries a new wife.
 You're in the wilderness.
 They get lost and get upset because they are lost.

 They will starve, and wolves will eat them, because this is a medieval one
 European forest, full of wolves, and they eat people.
 They wander around and come to a gingerbread house.
 If you are a skeptical person, and not naive, the first thing you think is:
 "This is too good to be true."
 A house, okay.
 A hiker's hut perhaps, or a shelter, that's possible. But a house made of candy.

 Something is wrong there.
 Do you know those types who pretend to be very nice, but actually aren't?
 Do you remember Harry Potter?
 Do you remember that woman?
 She was a bureaucrat.
 She had all those plates with kittens.

 Umbridge, Dolores.
 Dolores means sad.
 Umbridge means to take offense.
 She is the sad woman who takes offense.
 And she has all kinds of pictures of kittens on her plates.
 On ceramic plates.
 They are hyper-sentimental.
 "Oh, aren't they cute?
 They are on plates, and we hang them on the wall. "
 Very tasteless.
 And the sentimentality is a facade.
 Jung would call that a persona of compassion.
 But think of that old Dolores Umbridge.
 She's not exactly a compassionate type.
 If you released her into the world, terrible things would happen.
 And ... what's her name?
 The woman who wrote Harry Potter?
 That was exactly right.
 It is one of her best characters, I think.
 She has that hypocritical voice that people use who don't like children
 when they talk to children.
 "Oh, what a sweetheart you are!"

 You can actually talk to children, and they like that.
 And then they don't think you are possessed by anything
 for which they have to run away as quickly as possible.
 Anyway, Hansel and Gretel.
 The woman comes out and is very nice.
 And she says, "Children, you are lost in the forest.
 Why don't you come in for some gingerbread? "
 And then she puts Hans in a cage, a kind of bird cage I think, and Gretel
 gets all the slave work.
 So she's not that nice.
 And every day she fills them with gingerbread, and she feels
 Hansje's legs, to see if he's thick enough so that she can put him in the oven
 and eat it.
 And that means: beware of people who are too nice to you, because
 they try to devour you.
 It is the most important judgment of Freudian psychopathology.
 If you have a parent ... Freud focused mainly on mothers because the odds are higher
 that mothers do this.
 For a number of reasons, which we won't talk about,
 probably because they're baby-oriented, but well.
 If you are too nice to your child and do everything for him, what will happen to him?
 Then he cannot do anything himself.
 And what happens then?
 Then he lives in your basement until he is fifty.
 And one day he gets angry and shoots Dawson College.
 There is a deep metaphor in the story, namely: if it is too good to be true,
 it is probably aimed at your destruction.
 Okay, back to Sleeping Beauty.
 Sleeping Beauty, Aurora, will be baptized, and they decide the evil queen
 not to be invited to baptism.
 That is not a good idea.
 I had a client once, and all she wanted to do was sleep.
 She slept about sixteen to seventeen hours a day.
 And she did that partly by taking sleeping pills, because it's hard to sleep that much.
 But untouched, she did nothing but sleep.
 You may ask, "Why would anyone do that?" And you can say:
 "For the same reason people pass themselves out and drink themselves into destruction."
 It's painful to have awareness, especially when your life isn't going well,
 and you may be afraid of things. So why would you be awake and suffer
 when you can be unconscious and not suffer?
 In fact, that was her idea.
 She was a vegetarian, and she was terrified of butcher shops, and terrified
 for raw meat.
 That made sense, she was terrified of life, as it were. And if you
 are afraid of life ... if you think about it, it is, the "raw meat" part of life
 what you are afraid of.
 So that was very concrete in her case.
 So I took her to supermarkets, to the meat department,
 because that's what you do with psychotherapy.
 If any of you want psychotherapy, you should do what you least want to do,
 and that's not particularly fun.
 That is the road to enlightenment: you walk the road you would least like to walk.

 Now you know why people aren't enlightened, because it's not all fun and fine,
 and follow your gut and all that nonsense.
 It is: discover what you are afraid of, and what you are avoiding, and voluntarily confront it.
 Either way, I learned a bit from her background. Her mother, whom I met, was certainly the evil queen.
 She yelled at me for forty-five minutes in my office.
 Pretty remarkable.
 I had never ... I had only had one other person yelling at me in my office,
 and she was an evil queen too.
 But this woman was really a special case.
 I watched her performance with my mouth open.
 She kept calling my client three or four times a day,
 to tell her how stupid and worthless she was.
 So if you have parents who call you every day and tell you you're stupid and worthless
 you have your full right not to talk to them,
 because that's not how they should talk to you.
 Then you can say, "Shall I call you instead of you calling me?
 And every other week, instead of three times a day?
 And if you say something ugly, I'll hang up and stop talking to you for a month. "
 And then you might say, "I can't do that to my mother." Then I would say
 "That's because she's already won."
 Anyway, her mom loved her dearly when she was little, she was perfect.
 When she was little she was a princess. But then she entered puberty.
 And that's the end of the princess thing, because then
 you want to go out and have a life and hang out with guys and do all those things
 that are by no means childish or princess-like.
 And then everything went wrong, and it started to develop in a very bad direction.
 And that was partly because her mother refused to invite the evil queen
 in her daughter's life, because the bad queen is the negative aspect of nature.
 And if you have little girl, chances are she will grow up
 and will become a teenager, and then a woman. Unless you do something
 what seriously disrupts that, what you might be doing.
 So you better be prepared for that when she's three
 and not treat her like one whose feet will never touch the earth.
 You have to have all aspects of life there.
 I had another client.
 Her parents taught her that adults were angels, and I don't mean that metaphorically,
 they actually taught her that.
 As a result, they predisposed her to severe post-traumatic stress disorder,
 which bothered her for about five years. Because she met someone who wasn't an angel, what a surprise.
 And all he did was look at her like he wanted to kill her.

 And you think, "You can't get traumatized because of that."
 1) Probably no one has ever looked at you that way, so don't be too sure.
 2) If someone looked at you like that, and you thought adults were angels,
 then you would be well prone to developing post-traumatic stress disorder.
 You may think that you are doing your children a favor by the evil queen
 Keep them out, but you better show her now and then
 so they can get used to the fact that it exists.
 I think that's partly why children have pets.
 Like mice, they don't last long.
 So you have a live mouse for a while, and then you have a dead mouse.
 And that is not good.
 But you get used to things when you do
 and it may not be good to keep your children safe from that. Because they will
 have to grow up and survive in the harsh world.
 And it's not your job to make them happy.
 Your job is to make sure they are able to survive in the gruesome real world.
 Well, that's what happens at the beginning of Sleeping Beauty, it's like
 Hansel and Gretel.
 Then the evil queen still appears, because you can't keep her out,
 and she says, "Yes, that's fine and fine.
 I can not help it. But when puberty comes ... "
 Sleeping Beauty will hurt her finger on a spinning wheel needle.

 It has to do with blood, and we don't need much imagination to figure out what that means.

 "I will come back, and then all will break out."
 And then the parents get all overprotective, which is just the wrong reaction,
 and that is the story of Sleeping Beauty.
 Eventually the prince arrives and finds out how to solve this problem.
 She needs him, he's a good boy. But the bad queen puts him in a dungeon,
 in her basement, and she wants to keep him there until he is his age
 that he can no longer ride a horse. And she will laugh at him when he tries to escape.
 And then he tries to escape, and she turns into a dragon.
 "What is that?
 Why does she turn into a dragon? "
 But you accept that.
 No problem.
 "Of course the evil queen turns into a dragon.
 What else would she do? "
 And then she spits fire at him, and he knocks her off.
 And then he must cut his way through the thorns and thistles that cover the castle
 entwined.
 Then he wakes up the girl, and the fountains come on again, and everyone is happy.
 And you think that's a great story.
 And it is a great story, but it is a strange story, because it is an archetypal story
 and you understand it on an archetypal level.
 Let's take a look at some of it, and I'll talk a little bit more about it.
 To get started, let's see the beginning.

 Sorry.
 This is a lesson, so I don't want you to enjoy the movie. So I'm going to play with it.
 Well, tell me about the book.

 Is it a valuable book or not?
 How do you know that?


 Yes, it is inlaid with good and jewels. There you get a hint,
 that it is something valuable.
 Let's see if it works.

 Yes, that's right. Yes, it is a valuable book, it is inlaid with goods and jewels.
 Why is gold valuable?
 It's scarce.
 Yes. It looks like the sun.
 What else?
 It's morally pure, gold.
 Why?

 Yes.
 It's wealth.
 But it is morally pure, because it cannot be mixed with other metals.
 It does not mix with other metals.
 It is not subject to decay and contamination, so it is a symbol of purity.
 And jewelry, why are they beautiful and valuable?
 Don't scarcely.

 Yes, they sparkle.
 Even crows can appreciate that.
 What's glittering got to do with it?

 The sun.
 Yes, it reflects light.
 What should a good person do?
 You might say ...

 Yes.
 He reflects light.
 It's interesting because the reason crystals are the way they are
 transparent and reflective, is because their inner structure ...
 A crystal is a lattice of molecules, and you will find the same lattices everywhere in the crystal.
 So it's one thing, all the way down to the molecular level.
 What you can think about is ... especially when you think
 to the hierarchical model we discussed ... if you were best put together,
 and experienced the right amount of heat and pressure,
 then you would be the same on every level of your being.
 Then you would be strong and crystal-like, and you would reflect light.
 Either way, you'll immediately get a hint that this story is valuable.
























 So these are the good elements of the feminine, and they give her various gifts.








 Okay, we're out of time.
 I'll show you more of this in the next lesson, and we'll see what it means.