Dr. Petersen, I mentioned these notions of responsibility, virtue, and respect.
 I think you have spoken in detail about what you think students should not do
 In such matters as iprotest and some kinds of political activities.
 What advice would you like to give to students?
 How can students make the change they want?
 Of course. Read great books.
 Oh really. You have four years that have been allocated from your life by society.
 That gave you an identity worthy of pride. In addition to freedom.
 And you will never get this again.
 You have an identity that deserves respect. A university student and complete freedom attached to it.
 And you have these giant libraries filled with the writing of very intelligent people.
 And you know you can go to it and learn all these things.
 And you may ask why you should learn it?
 Learn it to get a job? Learn it to get high grades? You learn to get a university degree?
 All this is nonsense!
 The reason you come to university to learn is that
 Nothing is stronger than an intelligent person capable of thinking and expression. It's strength!
 And I mean strength at its best. It's control, influence, respect and competition.
 So you come to the university to strengthen your best skills.
 And is to be strong talk.
 Because if you have the ability to formulate your arguments, you are a winner in everything!
 And because when you win in everything, everyone around you also wins.
 Because converting yourself to something like a beacon means that you will spend the whole world.
 It is of course the best thing you can do.
 But you should assume that you are coming to the university in order to get a job
 Which is okay because it is much better than being without a job spending your time on video games.
 I'm not against video games, by the way.
 But it is not reason enough to exist in this world.
 This is what universities should call out for.
 I know what Harvard students are like. I have been teaching here for five years.
 You are so amazing! You are amazing.
 All of you can be the best people in the world.
 You are transforming yourselves into something prominent, meaningful, with historical roots and wise with knowledge.
 You can do whatever you want. Which I hope is for good.
 Because if you have a mind, all you want will be for good.
 Because nothing has meaning and deserves attention and is also useful in facing life's misfortunes
 More than confronting you with all your soul for good.
 Unfortunately, universities have neglected this matter.
 This is why you see everyone disavow humanity. And they must because humanity has been corrupted.
 This is because we no longer teach the students these things. It is very clear.
 Learn to think. Learn to talk. Learn to read.
 It makes you very powerful.
 I don’t know why the students are not told this. It is not so difficult.
 Everyone wants to hear about this. "Can I really do this?"
 Yes, you can do it.
 The entire community around you has struggled for thousands of years
 To provide each of you with this wonderful opportunity that you have before your graduation and at your graduation.
 Everyone is praying that you come here and see everything you can see.
 And this is what you should do instead of brandishing signs saying that you are wronged.
 You see Yale University students complain of being wronged.
 It makes me very anxious.
 For example, "We are against the ruling class."
 No, you are the children of the ruling class. You are still young.
 The only reason why you are not rich is because you are still young.
 If you look at the 1% of people with influence, you will see that most of them are very old.
 Why? Because when you get old and are reasonably successful you are exchanging your youth for wealth in the future.
 But you will still be old in the end.
 Are you going to barter? Are you exchanging your youth for this?
 If you take age out of the economic equation, things are completely different.
 Older people of course have more money. They have kept collecting it all their lives.
 Is this unfair?
 Of course it is fair unless you want to spend your life in complete poverty when you are in your seventieth year.
 And you don't want this.
 So I do not understand what happens to universities. I can't believe you are not told the first day you come
 "You are on a heroic mission here. You have to take your capabilities to unimaginable levels in order to highlight yourselves."
 "You will get out of here and no one can stop you."
 "You will be able to do whatever you want."
 That is why you are here. Instead, you are taught that the world is a place full of injustice and persecution, and that you are a victim.
 And there is nothing you can do about it. Except for the re-dismantling of society ruled by men.
 It is very pitiful. To universities, you feel ashamed that this is what students are taught.
 I am ashamed of it.
 I have asked many parents about their reasons for making their children go to vocational colleges.
 Because at least they are learning something useful. And something to say is really bad for someone like me.
 Because I believe that getting the best education possible is the best thing for you and the community.
 Why did the universities forget this?
 It is postmodernism, modern Marxism, and a philosophy of resentment of everything and victimization.
 Oh my God it's very pitiful.