Hello.
 This is an invitation to Dutch citizens and leaders alike.
 I am coming to the Netherlands next week for two reasons;
 Except the fact that I love the Netherlands and am always looking for an excuse to visit.
 First on January 17 from 10 in the morning to 5.30 in the evening
 I will speak to leaders from corporate members and other organizations in Amsterdam
 in a session called Foresight on the Future
 at the Warehouse by Wicked Grounds, in Amsterdam.
 Details of the session can be found in the description of this video,
 there you can also find information about tickets, which are still available.
 I will start that day with a lecture on the psychology of motivation and emotion
 in which I want to go deep into both the symbolic aspect all the way to the level of neuroscience
 how it is that vision and motivation and the regulation of emotions are so deeply entwined.
 What is meant by that
 the vision we establish for ourselves defines the framework in which one functions in the world,
 perceive the world around us and react emotionally to the world.
 I want to help everyone who comes to the session understand what that means
 in the most modern and current psychological way possible.
 So that's why I'll be talking about that for about 90 minutes, maybe a little longer.
 After that, participants will have the opportunity to
 complete, or at least start with, the Future Authoring Program,
 which is an online program that I developed with my colleagues
 which allows people to thoroughly conceptualize their lives,
 3 to 5 years ahead,
 and thus make a so-called plan
 to maximize quality of life.
 You start the 'Future Authoring Program', which is publicly available at selfauthoring.com,
 you start the program by looking closely at the most important aspects of your life;
 family, friends, intimate relationships;
 ambitions for the future from an economic perspective;
 spending time outside of work;
 and the regulation and control of drug and alcohol use,
 and visualize yourself 3-5 years in the future
 if you lived the life that would be the most optimal for you.
 The most meaningful and productive life.
 Then you will be asked to think carefully about those dimensions
 to decide how to specifically optimize those facets.
 And then write 15 minutes about what your life could be like
 in 3 to 5 years, if you would take care of yourself as much as someone you love.
 Then write 20 minutes about what your life would look like if all your bad habits,
 your shortcomings and character flaws would prevail and push you into the ground.
 Then you write a detailed plan of action to achieve your goals and achieve your vision.
 That includes writing about why it would be good for you to
 to take steps
 in this adventure, so to speak.
 But also why it is good for your family and wider society,
 thus fully articulating a plan.
 That will take up most of the first day.
 Details of the event can be found in the description of the video
 as well as an all-day timetable and information on tickets, if any, that are still available.
 The second event on January 19 was organized by a Dutch organization: Nederlandse Leeuw.
 With this event they hope to start a national discussion about Dutch and European identity,
 and about immigration policy.
 I am starting this event which includes 2000 people including a few well known speakers from different backgrounds,
 with a 45-minute discussion about the psychology behind identity
 and specifically focuses on Europe.
 Broadly speaking, where do we stand in Europe?
 How did we end up here?
 What have we done right or wrong?
 Where are we going and why? And how must each of us behave to get there?
 How should each of us behave in order for our stable and productive society
 also remains stable and productive and ...
 we do not fall prey to the temptations of radicalization, both left and right.
 I hope to start a process in which deep thought is given during the discussion
 Organizers hope that this will result in a list of about 25 recommendations
 for the future of Dutch and, more broadly, also European and Western society as a whole.
 There are still tickets available so the information will also be found in the description.
 Thank you very much, hope to see you there if you are interested.
 And that's actually all I wanted to say about it.
 Bye!