So the last time we talked, I talked to youabout how the knowledge structures that we
inhabit might be built from the bottom up.
So I’m showing you this diagram becauseit might clarify that a little bit.
What you see at the top - this is a hierarchy,a partially built hierarchy and so one way
of thinking of an attribute like good whenyou apply it to a person, or bad or evil or
wonderful, one way to think about it is asa description of an object, but it’s not
really.
It’s shorthand for a set of - well I thinkof them as micro personalities, but you can
also think about them as behavioral patterns.
Now, one of the things I mentioned to youabout - I talked to you a little bit about
words at one point, and what words signifyand this is a very complicated problem so
most of you are probably Augustinians withouteven knowing it because St. Augustine originally
proposed that a word was a label for a thing.
Of course, that’s how people naturally think.
I’m sure most of you would regard that definitionas perfectly suitable, but it’s by no means
the only definition and it’s by no meansnecessarily the correct definition.
There's a famous philosopher named Wittgensteinwho proposed instead that a word was like
a piece in a chess game which meant that itwas something that you did something with,
or you might think about it actually as atool.
And when you think about how you use words,you can see that you're using them often as
tools to interact with other people for apurpose.
What I like about the tool idea - the toolidea is a very evolutionary sophisticated
concept, partly because we’re tool usingcreatures probably beyond our other capacities
except for possibly imitation and languagewhich set us so far apart from other animals,
but the thing about a tool is that the differencebetween a tool and an object doesn't have
a user.
The word object doesn't imply user, but theword tool implies user, and it’s not obvious
that we ever interact with anything in theworld without interacting with it in some
motivated way.
And so, what we’re doing is we’re usingwords to get through the world.
To interact properly within the world andto move where we want to go.
So that’s the second way of thinking abouta word.
Here’s another way of thinking about a word.
A word is like a box of things and so imaginethat you cleaned out your basement and there's
a bunch of boxes downstairs and one box islabeled books.
Well inside that box, there could be any mannerof books.
Books is a very very diverse set of phenomena.
If you're moving, books are kind of condensedinto one thing which are kind of heavy objects
made out of paper.
You can also imagine another box that saysthings.
And in the thing box, I’m sure you havea thing drawer at home where you put all the
things you don't know what to do with so it’slike the category of all things you don't
know what to do with.
Things.
Okay so a word can also represent a relativelyheterogenous set of tools or entities.
That’s very very very useful to know becauseone of the things that happens often when
people are arguing is that they use the sameword but each word contains a set of different
objects.
You might say for example, is fear real?
Questions like that are very strange.
They're not really answerable in some sensebecause it depends on exactly what you mean
by fear because fear can contain a lot ofheterogenous entities, roughly speaking, and
it means - it also depends on what you meanby real.
So you can define fear and you can definereal and so that fear is a subcategory of
real or you can define fear and you can definefear so that fear isn’t a subset of real.
So, the idea that fear is a box that onlycontains a certain set of entities or a certain
set of tools and that reality is the sameis wrong, and people argue about those sorts
of things all the time, and they make thesebinary questions.
Is X a Y?
Well, X and Y are generally not well enoughto find so that you can easily find an answer
to a binary question like that.
Okay so, words can also represent a relativelyheterogenous set of attributes or objects
or tools.
When you say that someone’s a good personfor example, you don’t mean they’re a
good person all the time or that everythingthey’ve ever done is good because they wouldn't
be a good person then, they would be a saintor some other fictional character like that.
So, when you’re applying the label - we’llcall it label for the purposes of this argument.
It’s a descriptive tool actually.
When you’re applying a term like that tosomeone, it’s a shorthand for a variety
of states that this person could exist in.
The majority of which you regard as positive.
You might say he’s a better person thanshe is, and then you’d say well the proportion
of attributes that she has - I think I saidshe, whatever - it exceeds the proportion
of positives that this other person has.
So the other way you can think about a wordis - this is more complicated, it involves
a little bit of visualization.
So imagine you have a child’s train on atrack.
It’s going around and around the track.
And it’s got cars on it that you can putthings in, and all the cars are full of things,
and then on the track there’s a box withcutouts in it so that the train can pass through,
and on top of the box is a word.
And the word is things, and the train is goingthrough the box.
In some sense, what that would mean - imaginethe train is long enough - at any given second,
the box of things would contain differentthings, but it would still be a box of things.
And a lot of words we use are like that.
Not only do they represent a heterogenousset of entities, but the set changes depending
on the context that we use the word in.
So the reason I’m telling you that is becausea word, here’s another way of thinking about
a word.
This will be good for you computer - wellyou’re all computer people now of course.
A word is a low resolution image.
So you think about it.
A word is a good enough approximation of thething that it’s representing.
Sort of like a thumbnail.
Now obviously one of the differences of athumbnail and the real thing is that the real
thing exists at a much more, much higher levelof resolution.
It exists at many, many more layers.
You can use the thumbnail to represent it.
The advantage to doing that is that it doesn’ttake up much processing time, and it doesn’t
take up much memory.
So lots of time, you want to use the shorthandfor the thing rather than the thing because
it’s just too complicated otherwise.
And then you might say well how do you knowyour shorthand representation is a good representation
of the thing you're trying to represent, andthe pragmatists would say well it depends
on what you want to do with it.
That’s the tool-like aspect.
It’s like if you’re using word X to representpotentially heterogeneous class Y, and when
you use it, you get to where you're want oryou get close enough to where you want, then
it’s good enough.
So it’s like how you know a joke is goodenough, well someone laughs.
Okay, the joke is good enough, and so oneof the things that’s quite interesting about
the way you interact with the world, and thisis something the pragmatists really discovered
in some sense, was that you're always aimingat some bounded set of events that’s somewhat
different than the current set of events becauseotherwise you could just sit there, and then
you put your conceptions to work and youractions to work to manage the transformation,
and if you manage the transformation, thenit’s good enough.
You don’t have to go any farther than that.
So that explains partly how you can maneuverin the world with limited knowledge.
You use low resolution representations topartially hit vague goals, and that generally
gets you there.
That process was called satisficing by - nowwhat’s his name, an extraordinarily famous
economist and psychologist.
Anyone remember who coined the word satisficing?
Well, an economist psychologist would be HerbSimon.
That’s right, it’s Simon.
It was Herb Simon, and you know he said well,you’re often not out to optimize.
Let’s say in a search for a partner, tooptimize it you’d have to search through
several billion people.
Well you’re not gonna do that because youdon’t have the time.
So then you might say well, you don’t knowexactly how to do it but it’s something
this.
You have five attributes that you’re lookingfor and maybe two that you don’t know you’re
looking for but you are looking for, and thefirst person that comes along that matches
those well enough, you pick.
So it’s not an optimization issue, but giventhat you have a limited amount of time, you
can’t wait around for optimized solutions.
You have to go ahead with sufficient, andthen move to the next issue.
Okay, so all that’s a conceptual precursorfor taking a look at this diagram.
So we’re calling someone a good person.
So what does it mean?
Well we’re going to do a bit of a microanalysis.
We’re going to assume it’s a bit of ashorthand, low resolution representation of
the person and that you can decompose it.
If someone says X is a - Henry is a good person,and maybe he’s 45.
You might say does he have children?
Then you might say yes.
Then you might say well is he a good parentbecause you might assume that if he’s a
good person, he might be a good parent.
Now it’s conceivable that he can be a goodparent without being a good parent if he was
good at five other important things.
But let’s assume as a good person he’salso a good parent.
I think it’s reasonable to assume that goodparent would be a subset of good person, right,
because it’s more specific.
More specific means it covers less time andspace in some sense because good person is
a description of a person that covers howthe person interacts with the world across
the broadest possible amount of time and location.
And then good parent, well you can find thatout when they’re interacting with children
let’s say for the sake of argument.
There’s other issues, and then you mightsay well if he’s a good parent what does
he have to do to be a good parent?
Well he has to feed his children so he probablyneeds a job, and it would be better if it
was a good job.
So he’s got a good job and that’s partof being a good person.
And then maybe he can care for his familyand so care might be regarded as a more specific
subset of good parent, and so you can decomposecaring to, let’s say, play with baby, and
then you can decompose play into - well Idecomposed it into peek, tickle, and clean.
What’s interesting about this is those areall abstractions, but once you get down to
a high enough level of resolution, they’reno longer abstractions in that they’re actually
actions you undertake in the world.
Moving your hand is not an abstraction.
So at some point - and this is a nice elegantsolution to the mind body problem to some
degree.
At some level of resolution - high resolution- it stops being conceptual and starts being
action, and that's where the mind hits theworld.
If you go into an even higher level of resolutionthan that, like what do you have to do to
move your hand?
The answer to that is you don’t know.
You just do it.
And so your consciousness bottoms out, insome sense, at the level of motor activity.
So there’s a level above which you can’tperceive which are the networks that you're
involved in and there’s a level below whichyou can’t perceive, which is under normal
circumstances, procedural control which iswhatever enables you to actually move.
So then you might say well what are all ofthese things.
How would you conceptualize a decomposed goodperson.
Well then you might say well what are allthese things made out of?
In a sense, what are their constituent elements?
Good person, good parent, family care, playwith baby.
They're sort of like games.
They're sort of like stories.
They're sort of like rituals.
I think about them in these terms, so if youlook at - that’s where we get to this particular
diagram which we’re gonna concentrate onquite a bit.
Let me shift to it and we’ll talk aboutthat.
Now I don’t exactly know how to - what tocall this thing.
I think the best way of thinking about itis it’s a subpersonality and that the reason
I call it a subpersonality is because onlya personality has all the attributes that
this thing has and so the attributes are.
I talked to you last week about the fact thatthe Russian neuropsychologist for example
felt that people had to build models of theworld and so you can call this a model of
the world.
So the reason they suspected that was becauseif you brought someone - I think I ran through
this - if you bring someone into a laboratoryand you play them a tone, when they first
hear the tone they manifest an orienting reflexwhich is a change in skin conduction, and
that’s actually a consequence of neurologicalactivity.
And then if you play the tone a bunch, theystop having the reaction and then if you vary
the tone on any perceptible dimension, theorienting reflex returns, and so the inference
from that is obviously the person must beconstructing a model of the tone because otherwise
how would they know if something deviatedfrom it, especially on all those dimensions.
So not only is it a model, it’s a multi-dimensionalmodel.
Okay, now the upshot of that is for a longtime, people tried to figure out how in the
world we model the world, and then they triedto figure out how to make smart machines that
modeled the world that could then plan theiractions in the modeled world and then could
act in the world as a consequence.
They got nowhere with that because it turnedout that the world is so damn complex that
if you’re gonna model it, you’re gonnaspend all the time modeling.
You’re not gonna spend your time actingin it and you’re not gonna get anywhere.
It’s partly because the world is almostinfinitely complex, and so if you're trying
to get a computer to look at the world, youmight say well what is the computer supposed
to look at?
Everything.
Well, no.
I mean, you look at a lot in some ways, andnot very much in others, and half your brain
is dedicated, roughly speaking, to visualprocessing.
Then you’ve got your other senses to helpyou figure out what’s going on.
But you don’t build a model of the wholeworld.
You don’t build any model at all of theparts of the world that aren’t relevant
to you.
For example, your model of this floor is verylow resolution.
If I took you guys out in the hallway, assumingthe hallway floor isn't the same color and
I said, what was the color of this floor.
You would not be able to tell me, and thereason for that is who cares.
It could be shifting color all the time whileyou’re sitting here, you know, subtly, and
you’re not gonna care.
The reason for that is you’re not fallingthrough it, and it isn’t moving.
So it’s like an invisible presuppositionof your current knowledge structure.
And there's all sorts of things going on aroundyou that are like that.
You don't pay attention to the walls.
You really don't pay attention to the peoplethat are around you.
They could sort themselves in a differentway.
You wouldn't notice unless you know the person.
There's also all sorts of things that youdon't model.
Now you’ve all seen the invisible gorillavideo, I presume.
Everyone’s seen that.
Is there anyone here who hasn't seen thatvideo.
Okay good.
So that’s something eh.
It’s really something that there's a psychologyexperiment that's so well known you can talk
to a crowd now and almost everyone’s seenit.
It’s so shocking.
It’s like, of course I can see a gorillaif one was dancing around on a basketball
court.
It’s like, ha no you wouldn’t.
Or there's a fifty percent chance you wouldn’t.
Now the reason for that is, fundamentallyspeaking, is you're given a task when you
watch that video, and the task is to countthe number of times the ball is thrown by
the team in black.
All of a sudden, your perceptual systems reorientthemselves and you're not really looking at
people.
You’re looking at something that might beanimated stick figures who are engaged, momentarily,
in moving the object of perceptual importancearound.
So you can blur them out, which you do becauseobviously you can’t tell the difference
between a gorilla and the person dressed inblack.
The reason you can’t is you don't need to.
In order to fulfill the task, you can treatall the people like vaguely moving black objects,
and as long as that doesn't interfere withyour counting, then it’s irrelevant.
So actually, you don’t build a model ofthe whole world.
And you build a model of only the parts ofthe world that are relevant to your ongoing
micro action.
Now the problem that brings up is how do youknow what’s relevant.
Well that’s a tough question.
I would say, the reason you know what’srelevant is because some things don’t change
over time, and you’ve been evolving throughthree and a half billion years.
So you’ve built yourself.
If we go back to that other diagram, you canimagine the levels there from the micro activities
to the abstractions.
You think about how much building had to goin so you could undertake those microactions.
So like, here you can move your hand.
Well that’s great.
How do you get the hand?
Well, you know, it took a long time.
It took almost all of the three and a halfbillion years before you managed to come up
with a hand.
So, even underneath the microactions, there'sthis massive evolutionary history that's been
built up partially as a consequence of someof the unchanging features of the environment,
or at least in consequence to some of theslower changing features of the environment
that has given you this incredibly complexbody that’s really good at doing some things
and not really good at doing other thingsat all.
And so, that’s how you solve the relevanceproblem, and I actually think it’s one of
the most powerful arguments for the necessityof evolutionary theory.
It’s like this problem is so complex becauseit’s not only how you have to adapt to the
environment across time.
So you have to build a body that adapts tothe environment.
It’s worse than that.
It’s like the train passing through thebox.
The environment is not stable.
It keeps shifting and turning and moving andtwisting, and so not only do you have to adapt
to the environment, you have to adapt flexiblyto the environment while it transforms itself
at different levels of totality because sometimesthere’s minor changes to the environment.
Sometimes a meteor hits the Earth and we’replunged into darkness for four years, or there’s
an ice age or something like that.
So the levels of transformation in the environmentcan be radical and the evolutionary process
has to keep up with that.
The way it works, apparently, like I don’tbelieve this is the whole story although it’s
more or less the whole Darwinian story isthat something more or less works and it makes
a million copies of itself and there's tinyvariations in those copies often at least
in principle because of copying error whichis where I think the theory is weak.
And then they all die except for two.
And so, why didn't those die, and the answeris well they happened by chance to vary in
the direction that the environment variedand so they get to continue and so the reason
evolution works is that everything dies.
Everything fails because you think well, keepingup with a randomly changing environment is
impossible, so how do you do it?
Well you do a million things.
Most of them don't work, but you only haveto succeed enough to propagate yourself once.
Now, so I think that that’s not exactlyright because I don't believe that our understanding
of evolution is complete.
There’s a bunch of things that I don't believein.
One is DNA is pretty damn complex.
It’s not obvious how it could have evolved,and even the people who discovered DNA were
very very complexed that it existed.
So one of them - and I told you this - thoughtthat it came from outer space and that it
had evolved from somewhere else.
You might think about that as crazy theorybut cosmic winds, like solar winds and that
kind of thing, can propel tiny things vastdistances relatively rapidly, and over 13.5
billion years you can really get around.
I think the estimates, even if you used sub- if you used transportation methods that
are about the speed that we have, you cancolonize the whole galaxy in some like 20
million years because it’s exponential.
20 million years is a tiny tiny subset of3.5 billion years so it’s not as far fetched
as it sounds.
The problem is it doesn't address the problem.
Okay it came from somewhere else, but howdid it get there?
It just pushes the problem back.
But there's this other issue too which iscalled epigenesis, and that's really put an
old spoke in the scientific wheels in thelast twenty years because the theory was,
twenty years ago, that all evolution precededthrough random mutation, and it was random.
But it turns out that's not exactly rightbecause there had been a number of demonstrations
that if something happens to generation A,that will produce a transformation in the
genetic information that's transferred togeneration B. And the transformation often
seems not merely as a consequence of damage,but actually a form of adaptation to the new
environment.
Now that’s a tough one, like twenty yearsago when I was studying evolutionary psychology
and evolutionary biology, if someone wouldhave said, well you can transmit acquired
characteristics, it would have been like you’reover there with the creationists because that
was no go.
That was against the rules.
But it does happen, and the fact that epigenesishappens at all means that there's a lot of
things about how DNA works that we don't know.
I actually think what's happening is thatDNA is a very very complex microcomputer,
and I don’t know exactly how it operates,maybe it’s a quantum computer.
It’s very complex.
Remember it’s had three and a half billionyears to figure out what's going on, and it’s
pretty good at surviving.
So you don’t want to underestimate it, andthe structures it builds at the molecular
level are so complex it just - if you - there’ssome great animations of those things going
on at the molecular level on the net.
They're so complex that you can't help butthink of them as computational when you watch
them.
They're not random processes man.
Like I watched the little molecule that checksfor error in a DNA replication string.
I mean, it checks for errors in a DNA replicationstring man.
To figure out how it does something like thatwithout some form of computation strikes me
as impossible.
Anyways I think what happens is that overtime the DNA plays, like it can manifest itself
in many different forms and it also capitalizeson mutation.
I think that's how it works.
Now you know there's other I’d say kindof weak evidence for that.
Maybe it’s only evidence by analogy butif I take one of you and I put you in a radically
new environment, new genes will turn on inyour brain and code for new proteins and so
it’s like you're sitting there but in somesense there’s a whole set of potential yous
that are sitting there.
A lot of that potential is actually lockedin the genetic code.
I mean, it’s dependant on the informationthat's in the environment around it cause
it’s not all in the code but it’s enoughto get the process started.
So if I take you out of situation A and putyou in situation B, you build new brain structures
at the microlevel.
So you’re actually a different person.
That's actually a very interesting way ofthinking about the consequences of something
like exposure in psychotherapy.
It’s like okay, you're all timid and there'seighteen things you're terrified of.
You go out and master one of them.
It’s like poof, your brain is the not thesame.
Maybe you're a little braver.
And then you go master another one, and abunch more of you turns on.
Now I don't know if one thing turns on, somethingelse turns off.
You know what I mean is that there's onlyso much of you that can be turned on at any
one time, but maybe a lot of more you canbe turned on than is turned on, so.
I think it looks like that because peoplewho really challenge themselves across the
span of their life, they develop talents inmultiple directions.
People can really be amazingly good at a ridiculousnumber of things.
Okay so, Sokolov and Vinogradova showed thatyou model the world right down to the finest
details, but then Dan Simon and his crew showed“No you don’t, you’re so blind you can't
even believe it.”
It’s like okay, those are not the same setof facts, so how do we reconcile that?
Well here’s one way of getting a bit ofsense of it.
Look straight ahead.
Okay, now concentrate not on what you seein the middle of your vision but at the sides.
It’s probably better if you look at a personto do that, but it doesn’t really matter
though.
So look straight ahead but pay attention towhat you see in the periphery.
So I can tell you what you’ll see becausesome of it is very difficult to detect.
Way out in the periphery, it’s black andwhite.
You can't tell that though.
But we know that because if we change colorsway out in the periphery on you, you can't
detect a change.
And then out to about here, if something isn'tmoving, it’s almost impossible to see it.
But as soon as it moves, you can see thatthere’s something moving.
Sort of like dinosaur vision.
Remember Jurassic Park?
Don’t move because the dinosaur can seeyou.
It’s like well, you have dinosaur movementdetector still built into your nervous system.
And the answer is why, and the answer is wellif you can't afford to have a lot of your
brain wired up in the periphery of your visionbecause your head is only so big, then you
have to concentrate on only those things thatare most likely to be relevant.
And moving things are more likely to be relevantbecause they can eat you.
Moving things are more likely to be relevantthan stationary things especially if you've
been in the environment for a while right,because if you're in here it’s like the
stationary things are going to stay stationaryso you can ignore them.
You don't even have to see them, but the movingthings, they’re transforming at a time rate
that’s relevant to you so it’s good tobe able to detect those.
Now the periphery of your vision is actuallywired in more directly to your - to the lower
levels of your nervous system.
So it can trigger off things like startlereflexes which are very rapid, and it can
also trigger an orienting response which isthe movement of your sensory systems in the
direction of the stimulus so if somethingover here moves, then you go like that, and
then what you're doing is you're nailing itwith your central vision.
Now, out in your peripheral vision, if youfollow the optical tract back to your brain,
you'll see the peripheral retinal nerves don'tattach to a tremendous number of visual cortex
neurons, but the central ones do so each ofthe central neurons in your central vision
- the fovea.
Each one of those is connected to ten thousandneurons at the first level of elaboration,
and then each neuron is connected to aboutten thousand other neurons.
So it’s ten thousand to the ten thousandthtwo neurons in and so a lot of your brain
is focusing on that tiny little pinpoint thatyou use that’s foveal vision, and it seems
to be about big enough so that you can bringa face into high resolution in the center
and you can track the movement of the variouselements of the faces.
If you look at someone and you look abouteighteen inches to their left or to their
right, you'll see that you can't see theirnose anymore.
You see kind of a vague outline of their face.
You can still see the color.
You can detect their eyebrows, and you candetect their mouth especially if their mouth
moves or their eyes move.
You just zero in on that right away.
What’s happening is that way out here, yourvision is incredibly low resolution and the
resolution increases to the center where it’svery very high, and then there's some tweaks
like okay you can't really see out here, butyou can see motion, and that's good enough
because as soon as something moves, you canturn your head cause you can turn your head
and your eyes and you can focus that littlepinpoint on it and dance around cause that's
what you do with the pinpoint.
It moves around very rapidly, and you canscan that central area with high resolution.
So it’s an efficient use of limited resources.
So partly the way that you manage in the worldwhich is very very complicated, is that even
your senses simplify it for you.
There's only - you can't see the entire spectrumof electromagnetic radiation.
You can only see the visual light spectrum.
It’s very narrow.
There’s a whole range of sounds you can'thear.
There's things you can't smell.
So you're in a box and some things get through,but not everything.
So that simplifies things for you right offthe bat and hypothetically those things you
do detect or those things where it was necessaryfor you to detect for you to be here, over
this vast span of time and no doubt therewere variants all the way through that tried
to parse it up differently - slightly differently- and that didn't work out as well so they
aren't around.
So you’re around because of death and replication.
So it’s an interesting take on death, eh,because you're the product of an unbelievable
number of deaths.
Right, because all of those experiments hadto take place in some sense for you to be
here at all.
So anyways, okay, then, so you can see withyour central vision that you focus in on one
point and you reduce the others to low resolutionrepresentations, maybe even cartoons, and
then I also think, although I don't know thisfor sure and someone has undoubtedly done
the work.
My suspicions are that in the periphery, youdon't update - you know how your screen updates.
It’s sixty cycles a second, something likethat.
You update your vision at about sixty cyclesper second, and we know that because if the
screen resolution or if the screen updatedecreases below sixty cycles a second, people
can start to see it flicker.
So we have a refresh rate.
It’s around sixty hertz.
Some people can see flicker at higher hertzthan that, but most people can't.
Sixty is about right.
So, that's another way that you deal withthe fact that there's way too much for you
to deal with.
Your temporal resolution isn't very high,you know, so the smallest meaningful event
for you is about a tenth of a second long.
Now if you're in a car accident or you'rein some situation where it’s an emergency
and you get a massive burst of dopamine, youmight be able to speed that processing up
by a hundredfold.
Who knows?
But you're gonna be absolutely exhausted instantlywhen you do that.
I don't know if you've ever experienced thatin a car accident or something like that but
people often report that time slows down dramatically,but then afterwards they're just done.
So the reason you don't see a thousand timesas fast as you do is because you’d have
to be eating like a hummingbird right.
You'd need a big vat of nectar attached toyou, and you'd just be sipping on it or gulping
it down nonstop.
So you're also restricted in terms of yourtemporal resolution.
Okay, well then what else do you do to simplifythe world.
Well this is where the tool concept of concept,the tool concept of concept starts to become
useful because you're actually aiming at thingsall the time, and I really like the aim metaphor
because if you understand the metaphor well,it really sheds some light on what human beings
are like.
Chimps are hunters, but they're not hunterslike human beings are hunters.
We’re really really good hunters.
Chimps, they have to kind of mob an animaland then they’ll tear it apart, and they
like meat so they’ll definitely do it.
But human beings have been hunting in an unbelievablysophisticated way for a tremendous amount
of time, and there's a bunch of things aboutus that aren't like chimps.
So one is we can throw, and our bodies arebuilt for throwing.
Now you might think well that's not that relevantbut if something is chasing you through the
bush and you can throw a rock at it, it becomesrelevant very quickly.
And so we’re really good at taking projectiles,specifying targets, and hurling the projectiles
at targets.
And we can do that with rocks, and we cando it with bows, and we can do it with rifles,
and we can do it with rifles, and we can doit with nuclear weapons.
And so there's something about us that's obsessedwith hitting the middle of the target.
Now there's an interesting side note for thatwhich is that the word sin is derived from
the Greek word “Hamartia,” and hamartiais an archery term to mean to miss the center
of the target.
Now that's something very much worth thinkingabout.
It’s a very lovely concordance.
So we’re built on this hunting platform.
We can track moving things extraordinarilywell.
We have amazing eyesight.
Our eyesight’s better than any primate bya huge amount, and better than any other creature
except for hawks and other birds of prey.
So, and, we also use - so we have this intense,amazing capacity to zero in and here’s some
cool things about your eyes.
So, if you look at a gorilla, you’ll seethat a gorilla doesn't really have whites
in their eyes, and you might think well that'skind of weird because we do, and so what's
the hypothesis?
Well, if I’m looking at somebody at theback of the room, I can tell if they're looking
at my eyes.
If they're looking at my nose, it’s almostas if their face just gets a little bit vaguer
like we’re not communicating.
It’s eye to eye contact.
So our ability to specify the direction inwhich another person’s eyes are pointing
is phenomenal.
And you might say, well why?
Well first of all, there’s a lot of expressionaround the eyes right.
So you can imagine coevolution.
The coevolution is sharper and sharper vision.
Vision associated with detecting eyes andthen also more and more evolution for emotional
expression around the eyes.
So there's that.
But then, the other thing that I wanted - thereason that I would be interested in that
is because I want to know what the hell you’reup to because maybe you're a friend and maybe
you're a foe or maybe you're interested insomething that I should be interested in.
So we know what people are like in that regard,so you go stand out in the corner and you
look up, and soon there are ten people youhave around you looking up.
And why is that?
It’s because when they see where your eyesare pointed and embody you, they think well
that person - they don’t think this.
It’s the equivalent of thinking.
They think well that person must be lookingat something interesting because that's what
people look at, and if it’s interestingto them then it’s probably going to be interesting
to me especially if it’s in the sky.
It’s like what the hell, that’s not supposedto be happening.
So you're looking at people’s eyes becauseyou want to know what they're up to in their
facial display, which is your face is unbelievablyinnervated and controllable, both by conscious
and by unconscious means.
That tells you what they're up to, which iswhy you want to see someone’s face.
You don't talk to the back of their head.
You want to talk to their face, and you don'tlike it when they're looking like this or
looking like that or failing to make eye contact.
Although too much eye contact is a predatorystare.
So you know, you’ve got -Well you’ve got to get the balance right.
So now, what about the whites of the eyes?
Well the theory is that the reason we’vedeveloped whites is because it was easier
to see where someone’s eyes were pointedif there was a dark circle in a white space,
and what that basically meant was that allyour ancestors who were a little less fortunate
on the eye white side either didn't mate orgot killed.
Probably in misunderstandings.
So, our eyes stand out against this brightwhite background because that helps us - that
helps other people detect what we’re upto, and that means we can trust each other
more easily and we can - even as somethingas simple as like eye contact in a situation
where there’s a possibility of finding asexual partner is a very important component
of that because eye contact indicates interestand it also indicates, at least in principle,
the possibility of approach.
And so approach is dopaminergically mediatedand it’s a positive emotional state.
And that’s also why, interestingly enough,if you go into a pharmacy, and there's a rack
of magazines, and they're - what's on thecover?
Always.
Almost always.
Beautiful women.
Like on fifty percent of the men’s magazinesthere's a beautiful woman and on like a hundred
percent of the women’s magazines which isreally interesting you know because you might
think well why is that?
Women’s eyes are always looking out in away that they're looking at you.
So there was some interest - so it’s aninvocation of interest, and so, you know,
magazines evolve.
All the ones that don’t get bought fail.
And so what’s happened is they've all convergedto the same point, and the same point is that
the thing that's maximally interesting toa magazine purchaser is a beautiful female
face.
Whether it’s male or female.
Now on the male side, there's also gadgetsof all sorts.
And that may be that men are more gadgetsoriented than women.
So anyways, and we also know that for examplewith men, if you show them - this is a funny
little study.
So you show them a face of a beautiful womanand her eyes are looking that way, or this
way or they're looking right at him, you cancheck the activity in the dopaminergic center
in a place called the nucleus accumbens whichis the same that cocaine hits.
Face on eye contact, that thing lights up.
It lights up even more if she’s wearinga red dress.
Right, and you can get the same kind of lightingup with a red curvy sports car.
Yeah.
So it’s the, you know - my thought whenI read that was the perfect situation is like
a beautiful girl dressed in red perched ona sports car, with some cocaine.
Why red?
Why red?
That’s a good question.
I’m not exactly sure why - oh that's wrong.
I do know why red.
Ripe fruit.
Women have coevolved with ripe fruit.
It’s very sneaky of you by the way.
So that's why - you know that too.
You just have to leaf through a women’smagazine.
Lipstick is always associated with like applesthat are glistening in some way, or a peach
or something like that.
And we were primarily fruit eaters, and thereason we have color vision is to detect fruit,
ripe fruit.
So part of the reason that - also part ofthe reason that fruit turns red or colors
when it ripens is because the fruit that wassuccessfully eaten by creatures that distributed
the seeds was the fruit that was ripe whenit was eaten.
So as the color vision evolved, maybe therewas a red tint for only god knows what reason,
then a positive feedback loop developed andfruit got redder and redder, and at the same
time, women capitalized on that.
So that’s partly, I think, what explainsthe association between Eve and the apple
in Genesis because Genesis is also a storyabout gaining sight.
So yeah, that’s why red.
That’s pretty funny.
I really think that's pretty funny.
You know, evolved sensory significance isabsolutely everywhere.
It’s so deep inside of us.
Yeah.
I have to wonder about blood too, that seemslike it also
Oh yeah, yeah.
Red’s a significant color, but I think - Imean and it’s funny too because say there’s
a flushed face, well that means it’s infusedwith blood.
It’s also a sign of health.
It’s also a sign of sexual arousal.
But it is a sign of health, and so you seein old Coke ads from the 1930’s, the girl’s
cheeks are so red it looks like she has afever.
So it’s a form of sexual signalling thatindicates health.
So that's another part.
I mean these are multiply determined right,as anything as complex as vision.
Yeah, and blood means “Hey, maybe don’tgo there” or maybe it means there’s something
to eat.
Right, right.
Yup.
There was another theory with color sight,and it had to do with people’s facial expressions
- not expressions but depending on whetheryou're angry or aroused.
Oh definitely, you can see that those thingswould loop together.
Once the color vision starts to adapt, thecolor vision for fruit is way older, I would
suspect, because when we developed it, wehad fur.
But once the ability’s there and we loseour facial fur, it’s possible to capitalize
on the ability to detect the signalling.
And you know, we’re talking about a transformationthat's over about - we were living in trees
about sixty million years ago.
So the transition between us and them is sixtymillion years.
The separation between chimps is about seven.
And you know, chimp skin is so dark, you’renot gonna get a lot of signalling.
Okay so, back to this little diagram.
Now here’s the idea.
This is deeply informed, although I didn'tknow it when I was working on these ideas,
this is deeply informed by a guy named NorbertWiener who was one of the twentieth century’s
massive geniuses and a force behind the developmentof computation.
So this is a cybernetic model.
He invented cybernetics.
Now I didn't learn this from Norbert Wienerbecause I learned it from Jeffrey Gray, but
Jeffrey Gray’s source had learned it fromNorbert Wiener way back in the 1940’s.
In fact there was a convention back in the1940’s that Wiener presented many of his
ideas at that many psychologists attended,including Jean Piaget.
So Piaget’s theory is very much influencedby cybernetics as well.
Many many of the standard psychology cognitivemodels are cybernetic.
So they're grounded in thinking that's groundedin the engineering thinking and not psychological
thinking at all.
Yup.
Isn’t Humberd’s book called Cybernetics?]
No, Dianetics.
Yeah, yeah.
Okay so, how might you conceptualize the fundamentalelements of a personality.
Well, this is what it looks like to me.
The first thing is you're a moving creature.
So here's a funny story.
There's a little animal whose name I forget,and in its - it’s an ocean animal - in its
juvenile state, it swims around.
Okay so in its juvenile state, it has to coordinateits movements and interact with the changing
environment.
So it has a brain.
But when it turns into an adult, it attachesitself to a rock and turns into something
like a piece of coral.
It promptly digests its own brain.
So the issue is unless you don't really needa brain if you're not gonna go anywhere right.
So a brain is a going places thing, and wehave a very big brain and so it’s like we’re
always zooming around doing things, and we'vegot these hands that enable us to manipulate
things and transform things.
So the brain is for doing things, it’s notjust for perceiving.
Roughly speaking, the back half of your brainis for perception, the cortical part.
Mostly visual perception, but some auditoryand touch.
A lot of visual, and the front part is foroutput.
Motor action.
And as you proceed - imagine the front partstarts halfway here.
As you proceed from the midline forward, theaction becomes more and more abstract until
when you're dealing with the dorsolateralprefrontal cortex, you're thinking abstractly.
Now people think that when they're thinkingabstractly, they're thinking about representations
of the world because we think about objects,but that isn't what we’re doing.
What we’re doing is rehearsing potentialschemas of action.
So we have this abstract space, which youmight think about as a duplicate world.
You have an idea.
You test the idea like you would test it ifyou were acting in the world, and the consequence
of the imaginary testing is if you encountergrief, then you don't implement the idea in
the world.
Now you know, that doesn't always work becausethere's trade offs between short term pleasure
and long term punishment that makes it complicated,but what seems to have happened is that as
we've evolved, we’re very sneaky creaturesyou know.
For billions of years, the only way that youcould figure out whether you're right or wrong
was to go out and do something, and if youdied you were wrong.
But now, you can think about doing somethingand if the consequence of running the simulation
in your head is that you die, then you don'tdo it.
So what you're basically doing is spinningoff multiple potential use in multiple potential
universes and running them as simulations.
Now we really do that now because we’veexternalized it onto the computer which is
what we’re doing with really really complexvideo games.
So it’s so smart.
It’s an amazing evolutionary advance.
Now it doesn't work that well because sometimesyou run the simulation and you think, this
is a stupid idea, and you promptly have eightbeers so that you can go do it.
But, all things considered, that’s stillwhat this abstract space is for.
I should tell you something about this toobecause you're gonna hear from neuropsychologists
that a lot of what the dorsolateral prefrontalcortex does is - the cortex in general - is
impulse control, and that’s wrong.
That is not what it does.
And part of the reason I know this is becausethe correlation between prefrontal cortical
cognitive ability which is very tightly associatedwith IQ by the way.
The correlation is like 0.9 so you can evenargue it’s the same thing.
Fluid IQ in particular.
The correlation between dorsolateral prefrontalcognitive capacity and conscientiousness which
is like long term goal directed, future oriented,planned activity is zero.
Okay zero is a very bad correlation.
You know the old idea, correlation doesn’timply causality.
Well, wrong.
It does strongly imply causality.
It doesn't demonstrate it because with everycausal relationship, there's a correlation
so a hundred percent of causally related itemshave a correlation right.
A hundred percent correlation.
Well not necessarily, but it implies correlationbut it does not prove it.
But zero.
That’s bad.
That means those things aren't related.
Now, if you think about it, you can understandwhy.
They have to be unrelated because if you embodiedyour abstractions, then you wouldn't be able
to experiment with them.
You’d just act them out and then bang you’dbe dead.
So you have to separate the cognitive activityfrom the embodiment completely so you can
choose which of your potential selves to incarnateso to speak.
Now, the prefrontal cortex is a complex place,and the lower parts of it seem to be more
related to the relation between cognitiveactivity and the control of behavior.
But we have tried fifty tasks, I bet, tryingto get a correlation with conscientiousness
and we haven't found one.
We cannot.
The reason I’m telling you this is becauseconscientiousness is a very good predictor
of long term life success.
You guys get your grades for two reasons.
One, you're smart - assuming you are - andtwo, that you work hard - assuming that you
do.
That eats up almost all the variance in yourgrades.
Creativity is zero correlation with gradesat U of T, by the way which I think is extraordinarily
comical, and completely unsurprising.
It’s hard for an institution to grade creativitycause it’s an institution, and the problem
with being creative is that you force peopleto come up with a new grading scheme.
It’s like no, they're not gonna do that.
Right, because you come up with somethingcreative, it’s different.
Well what do you do with that?
You say, don’t do that.
That’s not what I want, even if it’s agreat thing.
It’s like yeah yeah, take your great thingand go somewhere else with it.
I’ve got five minutes to mark your damnpaper.
So anyways, this capacity for abstractionis divorced almost completely from embodiment,
and that's a good thing because that allowsus to experiment.
But it’s a bad thing because actually doingthe embodiment turns out to be very difficult.
It’s like your body’s got all these habitsbuilt into it that you've been working on
for a long time.
Here's another piece of advice.
Do not practice things that you don't wantto become because one of the things that happens.
Let’s say you take Danish speakers and youplay Danish backwards to them, and you do
a scan of brain activity.
It’s like their brain’s lighting up likemad because they don’t know how to say Danish
backwards, so you get a whole bunch of braininvolved in a new task.
But then as you practice the task, and routinizeit, less and less brain is involved.
So what happens is - this is in your standard,right-hand male and the reason I’m doing
that as an example is that’s kind of thesimplest default brain in a sense.
Women are more diffusely organized, and soit’s harder to exactly talk about their
neurological structure in a simple way, butin a right-handed male, what happens is the
activity starts to shift to the left, andthen it shifts backwards, and as it does so,
the amount of tissue that gets activated getssmaller and smaller and smaller and smaller
until you've built a little machine that takescare of that sort of thing.
But the thing about that machine is that it’sa machine.
It’s a habit, and it’s actually there.
It’s built into you.
So be careful what you practise because ifyou practise it enough, it becomes - it’s
like it’s you.
It’s the default you.
And then if you want to change it, you can'tjust undo that stupid machine.
It’s there permanently.
What you have to do is you have to build anotherlittle machine that shuts it off, and then
another machine that does the other thing,and then if you get stressed the little machine
that shuts the first machine off will stopworking and back your stupid habit will come.
So, people used to talk about the developmentof character, and there was something about
that that was absolutely right because characteris how you build yourself across time, and
it really really matters.
Only practise what you want to become.
If you practise other things, then well you’llbecome them.
That’s not so good.
Okay, so back to this.
Now, Gray and Sokolov and Vinogradova.
We’re gonna talk about them for a minute.
Now, they used to talk about animals.
They're mostly thinking about animals - rats,mostly - as having an expectancy model.
So you take a rat.
You throw him in a new environment.
What does he do?
Well the first he does is freeze because godonly knows what’s out there.
So it’s like paralyzed rat; he’s justseen the Medusa.
He’s paralyzed, and then if nothing attackshim, he starts to calm down a bit and then
he’ll start sniffing because rats are allsmell.
And he sniffs around, and he’s trying todetect cats, say.
Now, rats have such a good sense of smell.
If a rat eats somethign that makes it sick,it’ll never eat it again.
But, if a rat smells the breath of a rat thatate something that made it sick, he won’t
eat that either.
Right, so rats eh.
Man, they can smell things.
And animals are built around a smell brain,so they're a lot different than us.
We have - did I tell you about the t-shirtstudy of symmetrical men?
Oh that’s a funny one.
So we know that one of the things that signifyphysical beauty is symmetry, and the reason
for that is that all things considered, symmetricalpeople are more healthy than asymmetrical
people.
Asymmetry indicates taht somethings gone wrongsomewhere in the process of development.
So, we like symmetry and beauty.
And that's fine.
That’s all the way across the animal kingdom.
So butterflies.
There are butterflies that wont mate withanother butterfly if it deviates from symmetry
some absurdly tiny amount.
Like really, it’s micro measurement deviation.
I gues they have a butterfly template andif you know, the potential mating butterfly
doesn't match, it’s like flitter off.
You’re not getting anywhere.
So, that's fine.
So symmetry.
This researcher, god only knows what possessedhim, took a bunch of men, ranging from symmetrical
to asymmetrical - judged by a panel - andthen he had them shower and then he had them
wear a t-shirt for like four hours.
And then, he gave these t-shirts to womenand he said okay rate the scent of the t-shirt
from positive to negative.
Well the women overwhelmingly preferred thesymmetrical guys.
Yeah, no kidding eh.
So you just bloody well never know what’sbehind that attraction.
We know some things.
Symmetry’s a big one, but there’s a bunchof other ones too.
I was just wondering how that would correlatewith - I know attraction to smells also has
to do with your optimal mate.
Oh yeah, there’s a bunch of things.
Here's another study - this is a cool one.
This is one of the few psychological facts.
We don't have many psychological facts, youknow.
We have a lot of hypotheses about things butthis is as close to a fact as we've ever got.
So, back decades ago, these Israeli childrenwere raised in kibbutzim, and those were basically
- they were basically daycare for kids.
Group day care.
But the kids were more separated from theparents than they might be in a regular day
care.
Anyways, all the Israeli kids were in thesekibbutzim, and so then we have detailed marriage
records of the kids.
You know that people very seldom marry theirsiblings, and they're very seldomly in a sexual
relationship with their siblings, and youmight say well why is that.
It’s the case across cultures, with veryspecific exceptions like often high rank nobility
- they have an option.
Generally speaking, there's a powerful incesttaboo, as well as between parents and children.
So, some researcher decided well how do youknow who you're sibling is, you know roughly
speaking.
What exactly is it that’s not turning youon, let’s say.
Well so they checked out the kibbutzim recordsand they found that Israeli children who were
raised in the same kibbutzim never marriedeach other.
Whatever happened seemed to - it was as ifthat close, close contact in the very early
years triggered whatever the sibling anti-responseis and that was that.
It’s probably smell.
That would be my guess.
Now, there’s also another study.
One of the things they found with mice - Ihope it’s mice - is that mice will not mate
- is that right?
Okay, I’m gonna garble this up but it doesn'tmatter because the underlying point is valid
even though I’m gonna mess up the details.
Animal studies indicated, if I rememberedcorrectly, that mice will not mate with other
mice who have an RH factor that would increasethe probability of a miscarriage.
And neither will women, well not with miceobviously, but women do not like the smell
of men who have RH factors that in combinationwith theirs will produce suboptimal offspring,
and when you ask them why they don't likethe smell, they say that it’s like my brother.
Something like that.
So anyways, that’s quite remarkable.
Now back to the rats and the expectancy model.
We already know that you can get an orientingresponse out of a human being if something
deviates from expectancy.
Now people started studying this in rats,and the original conceptualization was expectation.
So you have an expectation about how the worldis gonna lay itself out.
That’s your model, and then if the worlddeviates from that, you have an orienting
reflex and what that does is protect you frompredation.
That’s the first level of the orientingresponse.
It’s really, really primitive.
It’s mediated only by a few neuronal connectionsso it’s unbelievably rapid.
Then after that, there’s anxiety and theproclivity to explore.
That both gets activated.
So it’s first protective, then you orienttowards the - imagine you're walking down
the street and hear a really loud noise behindyou.
It’s like really loud, so it startles you.
Well you go into a crouch so that if a tigerhad jumped on your back, it would be hard
for it to get your neck, and then tenths ofa second later, you'll turn assuming you don't
get attacked by a tiger, you’ll swivel andturn and orient all your senses towards the
locale that was specified by the sound becauseyou have a stereo auditory system and you
can localize events in space using that.
So you orient towards it - that’s part ofthe orienting reflex.
It’s a reflex.
It’s not voluntary.
So, and then once you've got your eyes trainedon it, and your ears, then you start to explore
it and then you might freeze.
You might get out of there which is a panicresponse.
That’s another thing that could be triggeredby the orienting reflex.
Different circuit.
Or you might think, “Wow, what’s goingon over there?
It looks interesting.”
And then you go approach it.
Now, those two - the exploratory part is mediatedin part by the hypothalamus which is a very
very old system, and it has a whole section,about half of it is devoted to the circuitry
that you would use to figure out what wasgoing on if something that you didn't understood
happened.
And then you have a whole other circuit that’shippocampal and amygdalic that regulates the
exploratory circuit and says be careful becausewhile you're gathering information, you might
get killed and the anxiety circuit takes primacy,generally speaking, over the exploratory circuit.
And the reason for that is you don't wantto get information and be dead so caution
is the watchword.
Now, the other thing you might think aboutwhich is an extremely useful thing to think
about.
Okay let’s go back to that diagram I showedyou with the hierarchy.
Right, so you’ve got the motor actions atthe bottom, and you've got the high level
abstractions at the top.
So, you're tickling the baby and somebodycomes home and says if you tickle the baby
this way, the baby has more fun.
And so how do you respond to that?
Well maybe you’re a little peeved becauseyou're doing perfectly fine with this baby
and someone’s coming and altering your ticklingmicro personality, and you know, if you're
irritable you’ll say well why don't youjust go off and find a baby of your own to
play with.
And if you're not that irritable, you mightsay well okay show me what to do.
There’ll be a tinge of negative emotionthere, generally speaking, depending on how
the person has approached you but your selfconcept can probably handle a micro change
to your tickling routine.
Okay, so that’s gonna produce only a littlebit of anxiety and irritation and the reason
for that is that the threat to you is proportionateto the magnitude of the system that's being
modified by the challenge.
Now this is really useful to know, okay, practically,and this is why.
Let’s say you’re having an argument withyour partner and you say, you’re a stupid
person and you’ve always been a stupid personand as far as I can tell, as far into the
future as I can see, you’re going to remaina stupid person.
So what are they supposed to do?
What are they gonna do when you say that?
They’re gonna cry like if you mean it.
They're gonna get angry if you mean it, andthey’ll not like you very much, and why
is that?
Well it’s like, it’s assault basically.
The only thing you can do in a situation likethat is walk away, ignore it, respond in kind,
or it degenerates into violence.
That’s it because there's no discussion.
You haven't left the person anywhere to go.
You’ve gone right to the top of their hierarchyand said everything about you is wrong, and
worse than that, all the mechanisms that wecould use to correct it won’t work.
So, those are fighting words.
So don’t do that unless you want to havea fight.
So then you might say, well what would youdo instead?
And the answer is deliver the least amountof information you possibly can, and so let’s
say you come home and your person is watchingTV, and you were kind of hoping they’d greet
you at the door.
You shouldn't break down into tears and sayyou’re a stupid person, you’ve always
been a stupid person, and you’re gonna bea stupid person in the future.
You should say, I have this peculiarity andthat is when I come home, I don't have enough
confidence to just be happy.
I would like you to come and say - just shutthe TV off for two minutes, come to the front
door and say “Hello”, and then you cango back and watch your TV.
Would it be okay if you did that?
And they'll think, “Okay you’ll have topay for it somehow,” but then they'll probably
do it.
But the thing is you’ve got to specify theroutine that you want transformed at the highest
possible level of resolution, and you wantto recommend the minimal necessary change
that will satisfy you.
So you can't say, “If you love me, you'dknow how to greet me at the door.”
Ha.
Not helpful because they're stupid.
Right, and so are you.
So you have to spell it out.
It’s like what do you want.
Exactly, what would make you satisfied, andthen you have to have your person grudgingly
practice that a few times and you have tolet them do it very badly and also in a bad
temper, and then you'd have to reward themfor it and then maybe three months later,
they'll do it properly.
So you need to know that because that's whatpeople are like.
It’s very hard for them to learn new things,and they're very resistant to it, but they're
very responsive to reward.
So another thing - this is partly what B.F.Skinner figured out so, when he was training
rats and he wanted a rat to do something,one of the things he would do is put - maybe
he was gonna train the rat to climb up a littleladder, and I mean he can get rats to climb
ladders and climb across the little monkeybars and then spin around three times and
then, you know, whack a ball and then eatsomething, like he got incredibly complex
behavior out of rats.
And the way he did that was patience.
So he put the ladder in the cage, and therat would just run around doing rat things,
and it would put its hand on the first rung,and Skinner would give it a pellet, and so
after even once, the rat’s gonna be likestanding in the immediate vicinity of the
ladder and then the frequency with which itsgonna go like this has just increased so its
gonna do it again.
Bang, pellet.
Well soon the rat’s just going like this,right?
So then, you wait until the rat tries theother hand.
So you give it a pellet then.
Well then it’s going like this and thenbecause it’s going to get bored, it’ll
go like this.
It’ll hit the next stair.
Bang, you give it a pellet.
Soon the rat is climbing and doing all thelittle things he wanted to do.
Now the problem with that is you have to bepatient.
You have to wait until the rat does what youwant.
Okay that’s more relationship advice.
Wait till the rat does what you want, andthen reward it, and it’s unbelievably useful.
It’s also extraordinarily positive.
I mean I’m being, you know, comical, insofaras I can manage that, about the situation,
but people love reward and they love attention.
People love attention more than anything else,and so if you watch through the day, and when
your partner does something that’s good,say “Bam, that was good” or something
like that.
You can be inventive, and then they'll doit more, and if you do that a whole bunch
like for a year, they'll be doing things thatare good for you just all the time.
But you have to be patient, which is veryannoying and you have to suppress your response
to only respond to negative things, you know,because what we know about the expectancy
models is that a deviation from expectationproduces a burst of negative emotion.
So you come home, and the whole house is clean,but there’s like - I don’t know - the
dog has shed on the rug or something and theperson overlooked that.
It’s like you're not gonna see the cleanhouse, you’re gonna see the rug with the
dog fur on it and you’re gonna say “Whydidn't you clean up the rug with the dog fur?”
And they're gonna say, “Good luck gettingme to clean the house again.”
And you know, because the thing is the exceptionstands out and what’s done doesn’t, and
the reason for that is you can just ignorewhat’s done because it’s done.
It doesn't get in your way.
So it just gets invisible really quickly.
So you really gotta watch that tendency.
One of the things Nietzsche said was thatif you really want to punish someone, you
don't punish them when they do something wrongbecause they expect that.
That’s not a punishment, they expect that.
They might even be relieved by it.
You want to punish them when they do somethingright because then you'll really hurt them.
So that's something to think about, if you'rein a relationship man.
If someone’s done something right, do notpunish them.
You do that two or three times and that’sit man.
You’re not gonna get them to do that anymore.
So, judiciousness.
Watch what they're doing.
If something happens that’s good, noticeit, and you know, if they’ve done a bunch
of things don’t concentrate on the thingsthey did wrong.
That’s not smart.
It’s really hard on them too.
In some sense this sounds manipulative andselfish, you know, because I’m teaching
you how to train your partner, but you shouldalso teach them how to train you because it
would be really nice if you could come homeand the person would say, “Well what did
you do today?” and you say “Here’s abunch of things I did.” and they say “Well
this looks really good, and that was great,and why don't you do some more of that?”
And you’re like “Oh boy,” it was a greatday.
So, you can train them to train you properly,and that's a really helpful thing especially
when you do it over a few years.
That's how you have a good relationship becauseyou're both clueless as hell to begin with.
You don’t know even what would make youhappy, much less what would make the other
person happy and so you've got to figure thesethings out bit by bit and you have to inform
each other, and you have to be patient enoughto let your partner do these things really
badly.
I’ll give you another example.
Sometimes I see couples sporadically in myclinical practice.
I’m not a couples counsellor, but sometimeswhen I'm working with someone, there's an
issue that needs to be discussed with bothpeople because otherwise it’s just stupid,
and one of the things I often recommend topeople especially once they have kids is that
they set aside - to use an anachronistic phrase- date nights.
Well, everyone hates that idea.
They say, well you know, they’ll just say,“I’m not doing that.”
That’d be one objection.
“We’re just not doing that.
That’s what we did before we got married.”
They'll say, “Well my partner will nevergo for that.”
They've got a bunch of excuses why that isn'tgoing to work, and so I've heard all those
excuses.
I’ve heard all of them, and then maybe Iconvince them, “Yeah, yeah, I know this
is stupid.
It’s awkward.
It’s artificial.
That’s okay.
Just try it once.”
So then they'll go and try it, and then they'llcome back and say, “We had an absolutely
miserable time.
Really.
We had a miserable time.
We couldn't agree on what movie to go to,and then she took me to her movie and I really
didn't like it and so we fought all the wayhome.
We’re never doing that again.”
And I say, well really, you’ve got thirtyyears, four hundred days.
That’s twelve thousand days.
Okay, so you're not going to do that.
You’re going to spend the next twelve thousanddays without having any real romantic evenings
and interactions with your spouse.
That's your plan.
And I like doing arithmetic with my clients.
They hate that.
They hate arithmetic.
It’s like well no that sounds like a badidea.
Okay well would you like some romance in yourlife or are you just done with that?
Well really, like people can go for a longtime with no romance at all.
They say, “Well no maybe, we’d like someof that.”
Well how much?
Once a year.
Well, no.
Once a month.
Well, no.
Once every two weeks.
Well, sometimes people are really busy.
Okay, that beats the hell out of zero.
Once a week, twice a week.
Okay, whatever, we’re gonna start with arange.
Okay, what would a good evening look like?
Like if you could both get exactly what youwanted, what would it look like?
Then they have to think about that becausethe previous theory was, “My stupid partner
should know what I like” and that's whatthe partner is thinking too.
It’s like good luck with that, no they don'thave a clue especially if they're men.
They don't have a clue so you have to tellthem what you want and how they could deliver
it, and vice versa which is very awkward andhorrible.
And then you have to practice it for six monthsbecause you know, it takes a lot of practice
to do something sophisticated really well,and then if you do that it’s like poof,
you got it for the rest of your life.
So it’s worth the aggravation, and you knowthe first time the rat puts its paw on the
ladder, its just sort of doing it accidentally.
You can't expect it to do it well, and that'sexactly how to view your own progress and
the progress of your partner.
It’s like let them do it badly for awhile.
At least they're doing it.
So if you think they should do it faster,well look real hard and see how easy it is
to change your own behavior because it’sreally hard to change your own behavior.
Everybody says, “I’m going to exercisethree times a week.”
New Years, and its like no one does.
They buy the membership and then they feelguilty for having them, but they don't actually
go to the gym - and that's a perfect exampleof how difficult it is to transform behavior.
Okay, so back to the diagram here.
Expectation.
So, the early models of expectation were cognitivemodels and the idea was the rat makes a little
model of the world, and then he operates inthat world according to what he expects.
Now there's a problem with that model.
There's a bunch of them.
The first is now we know that animals don'tmake comprehensive models of the world, and
that's a huge problem.
The problem is, well what do they get ridof, and how?
But the way you get rid of that problem isthat you introduce motivation into the equation,
and it’s interesting because the behavioristsalways thought of animals like blank slates
so they never really took motivation seriouslyas a contributor to cognitive modeling.
It’s also the case that probably ever sincethe Enlightenment, people have thought of
emotion and motivation as forces opposed torationality.
So you know, you're as rational insofar asyou didn't let your emotions and motivations
influence you.
But that's a foolish theory.
There are times when it’s inappropriatefor certain purposes to let certain motivations
interfere with your observations, but generallyspeaking you never think about anything without
being motivated because why would you?
Like, there’s a trillion things you canthink of and you're not gonna think of most
of them.
You have to have a reason to think of them,and the reason is that, well, all the time
you're operating in some sort of motivationalstructure, and you can sort of model them
using the same kind of hierarchy that we useto model the personality as such.
I’ll give you an example.
So let’s think of some basic motivationsand emotions.
Those aren't good categories by the way becausethere's no such things as motivations and
there's no such thing as emotions.
The things we loosely categorize into motivationsand emotions each have their own brain circuitry,
and so there are similarities between themand there are differences.
They're not clean categories.
Well, we’re gonna use the terminology anywaysbecause we don't have a better one.
For my purposes, you can roughly define amotivation as opposed to an emotion as a motivation
is really something that establishes, youcould say, a goal, but it doesn’t.
It establishes one of these.
It doesn't establish a goal, and it doesn'tdrive behavior.
So what it does is let’s say you're hungryand it’s nighttime, and you want to have
a peanut butter sandwich.
So imagine you're sitting there typing away,and all of a sudden this little image of having
something to eat creeps into your head.
It’s not usually quite specific.
It’s that there's something you would liketo eat.
So you think, “Ah, I could really use somepopcorn.”
So you're typing away and the stupid popcornthing keeps popping up, and finally your whole
body is starting to get into the popcorn andyou think “Oh to hell with it, I’ll go
make some popcorn.”
So what's happened is that your hypothalamus,roughly speaking, is monitoring your internal
body state and it thinks that you need some- maybe you need some salt, but maybe you
need some food, and so it’s gonna startpopping up, not a drive.
It’s not like all of a sudden you’re arobot, like a popcorn seeking robot and you're
laying out your chained together conditionpopcorn making and eating routines.
That isn't what happens.
What happens instead that you start to envisiona new state of being, and that state of being
has a goal which is you eating some popcorn,and it has you where you are which is in an
insufficient state of popcorn and then what'shappening as well is that the motor processes
that you would use to implement that are alsodisinhibited.
They're there.
You already know how to do it.
They get disinhibited or you can think ofthem as getting primed.
They're not.
They're getting disinhibited, but you canthink of them as getting primed.
And at some point, that becomes overwhelmingenough - say, pressure from the hypothalamus
which is really what's bloody well in control.
It says yeah, yeah, enough internet surfing.
Off to the popcorn, and so you leap up andthen what do you do?
You reorient the way you're looking at theworld.
Everything in the world becomes low resolution,or even zero except those few things that
are relevant to your new quest.
Down the stairs you go.
You find the right pan; you find the popcorn,getting irritated if you can't find it, right,
because - now you see it’s interesting becauseyour emotions align along your goals.
As long as you're pursuing a beeline to yourgoal, and everything's laying itself out not
as you’d expect, but as you want, then youremotions stay positive but as soon as something
deviates then you're irritated, and the reasonfor that is like let’s say you can't find
a popcorn pan.
Well your brain is computing, well somethinglike this.
This is obviously not how it works, but it’san - x amount of energy and matter from popcorn
means it has x value.
If you expend a whole bunch of energy runningaround in your clueless state trying to acquire
popcorn, you can easily get to the point whereyou've expended more energy and time than
the popcorn delivers.
And if you do that for a month, then you die.
So it’s perfectly reasonable for you toget irritated when the path length to your
destination increases radically, and you mightget even more irritated if you can’t find
any popcorn, and it’s like oh no I haveto dispense with the popcorn micro personality
and it’s all irritated because it’s sortof alive.
It’s irritated you have to squash it, andthen you have to come up with well maybe I
can have a peanut butter sandwich.
And then pop, up comes a new micro personalitythat orients itself towards the goal, and
so all the time you’re doing that, you'realways in a motivated state.
Now, it’s not a drive because it’s notdeterministic, but it does have a behavioral
element.
You have all these Piagetian subroutines.
They're stored in your body, you know, allyour body capacity or your skills.
And you know which set of those you’re likelyto use if you’re going to do x thing.
So those get prepared, and then your perceptionsreorient towards the new goal.
It’s like a hunting goal.
You're fixated on it, and then your emotionsorient along that so as long as things are
going well, you're happy.
You’re hopeful.
Things are proceeding.
That’s positive emotion; that’s dopaminergicallymediated, and if things aren't going well
it’s either, well, it’s any amount ofnegative emotion from mild irritation to full
blown temper tantrum.
So that’s - and you’re - okay that’sthe simple story.
The complex story is okay, you’re hungry,you’re thirsty, you’re tired, you’re
hot, you’re lonely.
You need to play.
Okay, so let's say you've got, for the sakeof argument, let’s say you have eight fundamental
motivational systems.
Now, who cares how many.
It’s a finite set.
It’s under twenty.
Depends on whether you include anger.
Is anger motivation or emotion?
Is pain motivation or emotion?
We don’t care because they're not formalcategories.
So anyways, there's a set number of them andthen so they have to run to satiation.
So what satiation means is they set up anend state; you perform the routines, you achieve
the end state, and the system shuts down.
It’s satiated.
Now you'll experience that as satisfaction,not as pleasure.
And you’ll think well what's the difference?
It’s tight.
It’s complicated, but it’s important.
The kind of positive emotion that people reallylike is associated with search and the hope,
not with the acquiry because what happenswhen you acquire is well you're no longer
in this state which has an impulse to actionin it, but that's exciting.
That’s fun.
You're on the track of something.
It’s like you’re alive while you're searchingfor something.
Well then you find it.
It’s like good, you need to find it, butthen the whole thing disappears and you're
sitting there thinking well I’ve just graduated.
Now what?
Right, because that’s what’ll happen whenyou graduate.
It’s like hey you're a student.
You've got status.
You’ve got a hierarchy of values.
You've got a way of orienting yourself inthe world, and you have an identity.
So you're in there, and everyone's happy aboutit and so one day you graduate.
It’s like success.
Well really, it’s like poof that’s gone,and the next thing you know, you’re like
handing out coffee at the local Starbucks.
Yeah, well you get the point.
You've experienced this all the time in yourlife.
You hit a pinnacle.
You've obtained something, but the problemis that now what?
You have to conjure up a whole new you.
So some of it is satisfying, you’ve accomplisheda goal, but some of it’s just a big pain
in the neck.
It’s like uh oh, student me has disappearedand now it’s frantically searching for employment
me, and that me doesn't have the status, andis in a space of much more radical uncertainty.
So don't be thinking that getting to whereyou want to go is what you want.
What you want is to bloody well make surethat the voyage is worth it.
Now it’s very interesting because peopleare really wired up this way, and I think
it’s because we’re so radically exploratory.
So, when you’re proceeding towards a valuedgoal, let’s call that a cue that goal attainment
is about to occur.
It’s going to occur in some chain.
A leads to B, B leads to C, C leads to D,and so on.
You're like a hound on a trail.
It’s positive, like yeah this is working.
Yeah, this is working.
Yeah, this is working.
That’s positive.
It’s moving you ahead, and that's reallywhere you experience a lot of your positive
emotion.
That’s dopaminergically mediated.
That’s the system you kick with cocaineor any of the other drugs of abuse that people
use that don't quell anxiety.
It’s a very, very desirable motivationalstate.
I read awhile back somebody who said you canbuy anything but you can't buy wanting anything,
and that's a staggeringly interesting commentbecause you think well, is wanting a positive
state?
Well you don't have it, so that's kind ofannoying and you think, “No I don't want
to want things.
I want to have them.”
It’s like yeah, don’t be so sure aboutthat.
So one of the things, one of the ways peoplehave figured out how to deal with that is
they decide they want something that theycan't get and that's actually extraordinarily
smart, and it’s a deep archetypal idea.
Here’s an example.
You’ve seen Pinocchio, right?
Okay, so Pinocchio is about a puppet, a marionette.
So that means someone else is pulling hisstrings.
Right?
We don't know who.
Sometimes it’s virtually Satan himself.
Remember the Stromboli?
There's another character just after him isthe coachman.
The coachman, he’s like king of the thievesand he ends up pulling Pinocchio’s strings.
So there’s one scene in the Disney moviewhere the coachman reveals himself and he’s
completely red, he has really big teeth; he’sa satanic figure, and he scares the fox and
the cat who are like low level criminals whothink they're bad, but you know, have never
really met bad.
He just scares them right into the corner,and so it’s all of a sudden this person
reveals the archetype behind and just closesback down pulling Pinocchio’s strings.
Okay, now.
He’s a marionette.
Well, the first question that arises is who’spulling your strings?
And that’s a really good question.
One of the things Jung said was “Peopledon't have ideas, ideas have people.”
You know, you can think about that for aboutthree months and it should make you afraid
the whole time because as soon as you getthat, you think uh oh.
Let’s say you're an ideologue of some sortbecause some of you probably are: socialist,
fascist, environmentalist, something thathas -ist on the end.
It’s like you think those are your ideas.
They’re not.
You're their tools and that's fine.
If you want to be a tool of those ideas, yougo right ahead, but you don't know where those
ideas are leading and they could well be leadingsomewhere you do not want to go.
Now the plus side is you don't have to takeresponsibility for it because you’re just
drifting in an ocean of thought.
But one of the things that I learned fromJung was you should figure out just exactly
which ideas are possessing you and then youshould decide if those are your ideas, and
the probability that they are is zero.
They’re not your ideas.
It’s hard to have your own ideas.
You have to derive them from your own experience,and especially when you're not very old, you
don't have that much experience and so youcan grab books full of ideas and claim them
for your own which is not acceptable.
You can use those ideas to inform your ideas,but they're not your ideas.
You're just a puppet, and you know the Pinocchiomovie is very interesting that way because
he's a puppet of forces that are really noton his side.
Seriously not on his side.
Okay anyways, back to the Pinocchio movie.
Give me one second.
So Geppetto doesn't have a son.
Now, Geppetto’s a good guy right?
He’s a toymaker.
He’s got this little warm cabin.
It’s cozy.
He’s a good guy.
He’s friendly.
He has a little cat.
He pays attention to his little fish, he takescare of that.
So we know Geppetto’s a good guy and hemakes this puppet and he thinks, “Man I’ve
got a puppet but maybe I’d rather have somethingreal.
That’s a good question for parents.
You want a puppet, or do you want somethingreal?
And the answer is, generally often, I’lljust have a puppet as long as it does exactly
what it - maybe it’ll be a medical schoolpuppet because that's certainly one good form
of puppet.
Okay, so Geppetto decides cause he’s a goodguy, he thinks no no I don't want this thing
to have strings.
I want it to be its own thing.
I want it to be autonomous, individual, real.
Okay, so what does he do?
He wishes.
Right?
What’s he wish on?
A star.
Why do people wish on stars?
Of all the crazy things.
Well it’s a divine thing.
It’s like there’s heaven, it’s all - it’sat the infinite.
You go out at night and you see the stars,which you can't in the city but you go out
somewhere dark and you see the stars, andit’s like you and the infinite.
And it really is.
It’s a perfect representation of your relationshipwith the infinite because the universe is
about as infinite as you need, and it’sgoing to give you a sense of awe and that's
partly why archaic people partly thought Godwas in the sky.
It’s like, they weren't stupid, these people.
They thought God is what fills you with awe,so you look at the sky and think wow, that’s
something.
It’s an instinct.
It’s not a cognitive construction.
So anyways, you aim at a star, and it’sthis twinkling thing in the darkness, right.
It’s the light in the darkness and it’sabove the worldly environment.
It’s something transcendent.
So that’s what Geppetto wishes on.
It’s like, I’m gonna aim high.
That’s what he says.
Aim high.
And he thinks well it’s not very likelybut I might as well aim high.
That’s a very good piece of advice.
You want to aim so high you can't attain itbecause then you've got something worth - you
might think that’s such perverse.
That’s such a perverse piece of advice.
Why would you chase something you can't have?
Well the answer might be cause the chasingis worth it, and then you might think well
what’s worth it?
Well I can give you a hint about that too.
It’s like develop your character becausewhat you've got is what you carry with you
wherever you go, and it’s way better tobe able to do things than to be rich cause
if you're rich, well then that disappears.
Poof, you're poor.
But if you can do things short of being demolished,and even then people are unbelievable at overcoming
those things.
It’s like you're on the way.
Here’s an interesting experiment we didwith undergraduate women.
So, there's this idea in evolutionary psychology.
It’s called hypergamy, and hypergamy isthe tendency of women to choose mates who
are slightly older than them, it’s aboutfour years on average cross culturally, and
who are higher in the status hierarchy thanthey are.
It’s a very well documented tendency, andpeople who are cynical about that think women
want wealth, and I thought well it’s nota bad theory because it kind of evens the
scales.
It’s like you're gonna have a family.
You’re basically - a chimpanzee baby clingsto its mother’s fur for five thousand miles
in the three or four years its doing its clinging.
It’s like its a major league impediment,and you know, if you're a new mother, your
life is so much more complicated than it iswhen you were single that it’s not even
the same conceptual universe.
It’s a major league responsibility, andit slows you down.
So you might think the logical thing to dois to balance the scales a little bit and
that's perfectly reasonable, but I thought,“Nah, I bet you women are smarter than that.”
I bet you can fool them, and the pick up artistsdo that all the time because they mimic status.
So, you can fool them but they're smart.
So what we did - I never published this fora bunch of reasons, but.
Okay so what we did was we took pictures ofthe same guy - you know kind of an average
looking guy.
He’s alright, and we had four stories abouthim, and one story was a poor useless guy.
That’s an easy story right.
You know, sits on his couch, plays video games,eats Cheetos, covered with dust.