Nietzsche talking about the European stateof mind at the end of the 19th century, so
Nietzsche says: well, we’re in this terriblesituation, right?
God is dead, we’ve killed him, what doesthat mean?
Well, we’ve taken our evolved metaphysicswhich structures our moral viewpoint and undermined
it by rational criticism – peculiar movephilosophically because it was never established
on rational grounds anyways.
We’ve undermined it rationally and replacedit with, well, nothing, nothing.
What’s the consequence of that?
Well, he outlines that here.
“Of what is great, one must either be silentor speak with greatness.”
And you can think about this as a prophesyon the events of World War I and World War
II and the Gulag archipelago and the 60 millionpeople dead in the Soviet Union and the whole
unfolding of 20th century history and thegreat ideological battles that characterized
that unfolding.
So this is something Nietzsche sees comingand knows why.
He says:“of what is great, one must either be silent
or speak with greatness.
With greatness.
That means cynically and with innocence.
What I relate of the history of the next twocenturies, I describe what is coming, what
can no longer come differently.
The advent of nihilism, right, the beliefin nothing.
Our whole European culture is moving for sometime now with a tortured tension that’s
growing from decade to decade as towards acatastrophe, restlessly, violently, headlong
like a river that wants to reach the end thatno longer reflects.
It’s afraid to reflect.
He that speaks here has conversely done nothingso far but to reflect as a philosopher and
solitary by instinct who has found his advantagein standing aside outside.
“Why does the advent of nihilism become necessary?
Well, because the values we’ve had hithertothus draw their final consequence because
nihilism represents the ultimate logical conclusionof our great values and ideals because we
must experience nihilism before we can findout what value these values really have.
We require at some time new values.
Nihilism stands at the door whence comes thisuncanniest of all guests.
Nihilism, right?
Your beliefs are undermined once, what’sthe consequence of that?
Well, one consequence is the belief is undermined.
The other consequence is more metaphysical,which is: fooled once, you no longer have
the belief.
But maybe it’s even worse than that becausehuman beings can generalize.
Fooled once, you never have any, you no longerhave any belief in beliefs,
which means you say something like this: Idon’t care what you think, doesn’t matter
what you think, the world is such a terribleplace that no interpretation whatsoever can
possibly suffice.
That’s nihilism.
No meaning system whatsoever can possiblysuffice.
Well, what’s the flaw?
Well, the flaw is: well of course no systemof coherent belief can suffice because most
of the world’s transcendent.
You can’t encapsulate everything that is,in your sphere of belief
and what you might say then is that if youever believe that what you believe is what
should support you, the facts you know say,or the interpretation you place on the world,
then your faith is badly misplaced.
You don't believe in what you believe, youbelieve in something that’s deeper than
thatAnd so then you see what’s wrong with Tolstoy,
right, and Tolstoy’s story and Tolstoy says,accounting for his collapse in the stability
of Christian belief,he said: this all happened, this collapse
of my belief, when I was not yet 50 yearsold.
I should have been considered a completelyhappy man.
I had a good, loving, beloved wife, fine childrenand a large estate growing and expanding without
any effort on my part.
I was respected by friends and acquaintances,praised by strangers and could claim a certain
renown.
I was not physically nor mentally unhealthy.
On the contrary, I enjoyed a physical andmental vigour I had rarely encountered among
others my age.
I could keep up with the peasants workingin the fields and work eight and ten hours
at a stretch without suffering any after-effectsfrom the strain.
And in such a state of affairs, I came toa point where I could not live and even though
I feared death, I had to employ ruses againstmyself to keep from committing suicide.
It was as though I had lived a little, wandereda little until I came to a precipice and I
clearly saw that there was nothing ahead exceptruin.
And there was no stopping or turning back,no closing my eyes so that I would not see
that there was nothing ahead except the deceptionof life and of happiness and of the reality
of suffering and death, of complete annihilation.
I grew sick of life.
Some irresistible force was leading me tosomehow get rid of it.
this thought was such a temptation that Ihad to use cunning against myself in order
not to go through with it.
And there I was, a fortunate man carryinga rope from my room where I was alone every
night as I undressed so that I would not hangmyself from the beam between the closets.
And I quit going hunting with a gun so thatI would not be too easily tempted to rid myself
of life.
I myself did not know what I wanted, was afraidof life.
I struggled to get rid of it yet I hoped forsomething from it.
My position was terrible.
I knew that I could find nothing in the wayof rational knowledge except a denial of life
and in faith I could find nothing except adenial of reason.
And for me this was even more impossible thana denial of life.
according to rational knowledge, it followedthat life is evil and people know it.
I described my spiritual condition to myselfin this way: my life is some kind of stupid
and evil practical joke that someone is playingon me.
In spite of the fact that I did not acknowledgethe existence of any someone who might have
created me, the notion that someone broughtme into the world as a stupid and evil joke
seemed to be the most natural way to describemy condition.
I could not be deceived.
All is vanity, happy is he who’s never beenborn, death is better than life, we must rid
ourselves of life.
Having realized all the stupidity of the jokethat is being played on us, and seeing that
the blessings of the dead are greater thanthose of the living and that it’s better
not to exist, the strong act and put an endto this stupid joke and they use any means
of doing it – a rope around the neck, water,a knife in the heart or a train.
Now the interesting thing about this, I think,is first of all, a Russian wrote it; and second
of all, it was written in the late 1900s.
And even more particularly is that you notethat when the strong act, using a rope around
the neck, water, a knife in the heart anda train, well, Tolstoy’s talking about suicide.
There’s no necessary reason to presume thatthis should only be violence engendered against
the self, right?
If life is a stupid and evil joke, then what’sstopping you from benevolently putting an
end to the suffering of others, right?
Benevolently in theory at least.
Well, you know that’s one perspective, right,but then there’s always the perspective
of the lady who went to see the psychiatristin T.S.
Eliot’s poem, which is: well, if when youreyes are open life appears as nothing but
suffering and pain to you, it could be thatthat is how life is.
But it could also be that there’s somethingwrong with the way that you’re looking at
the world.
And in some ways, that’s a much more humbleperspective, right, because the alternative
is: well, I know what’s going on and I justlook out there and there’s the world and
I’ve pretty much got it, like I know whatit means and what it means is pointless suffering
and pain and that’s my model and I don'tsee any reason to question it.
But then the alternative is: well, wait asecond, there’s always the possibility that
I don’t know absolutely everything and thisfinal and horrible judgment that I’m placing
on the conditions of existence could conceivablybe misplaced, given the sort of presumptuousness
of the claim,right?
I’m in a position to render final judgmenton the moral value of existence as such.
It seems to me reasonable to presume thatthat’s not the kind of statement that you
should easily makeAnd I remember when George Bush launched his
most recent war, the initial terminology,I think this was for the Afghanistan battle,
was: Operation Infinite Justice.
But he retracted that phrase after a numberof religious leaders objected to its kind
of presumptuousness –which I thought was quite reasonable because
infinite justice is something that most peopleshould probably not hope for, right, because
you never know precisely what infinite justicemeans
because it might just mean that every bloodymistake you’ve ever made, you’re going
to pay for.
And I suppose that would be just as applicableto George W. Bush as it would to anybody else
And then Milton again describes the developmentof this adversarial spirit.
He says: first, pride, pride and worse, ambition,threw me down.
That’s Satan’s lament when he’s in hell.
And Milton’s description of hell is extremelyinteresting.
He said: the reason that hell is characterizedby its structure is not so much because of
its nature precisely, it’s because of itsdistance from the good.
So the farther you are away, say, from whatconstitutes the good, the more suffering is
endemic to that state.
So it’s the distance away from somethingthat constitutes the suffering.
And then Milton says: it’s very interestingto do an analysis of Satan’s character and
the notion of hell per se because how in theworld can you reconcile the idea of a good
God with the notion of this continual suffering?
Milton says: well, Satan can step out of hellin one moment, all he has to do is admit that
he was wrong.
And that’s the one thing that he will notdo under any circumstances whatsoever
So then we put one more twist on the storyand we say something like this:
OK, we already know that part of the reasonthat people have belief systems is so that
they can structure their interactions withthe world.
It’s a tool box, say.
We’re playing a game, we share the rules,that’s fine, we can cooperate with one another.
It could be other than it is but it’s theway it is and it works for us, that’s fine.
There’s nothing absolute about it exceptthat a structure like that is necessary.
Now whenever there’s a threat to that sharedview of the world, well then we’re afraid
and for good reason and it’s not surprisingunder those circumstances that we fight to
defend what we’ve made ours.
But then you say, say you adopt this perspective,right, and it’s this vengeful desire to
destroy that extends beyond other individualsand beyond society even to the structure of
experience as such.
And then you think: well, what’s the bestmask for that and how do these two processes
sort of interact?
And you think: well, the most efficient wayto do terrible things is to mask them with
the highest order of morality and that’sprecisely what the totalitarian does.
So that way, he gets to have his cake andeat it too.
He’s perfectly well protected from apprehensionof the world because his belief system is
complete, plus his underground motivations,which is this constant desire for revenge,
can find their expression within the totalitarianstructure and remain invisible even to himself.
So he can say to himself: well, the reasonI threw all those farmers out of their house
in 1920 and stole their soup and their foodand their grandmother’s blankets and everything
they’d worked to own was because I was buildinga socialist paradise, right?
And it was a good thing for me to go intothat house and not a bad thing.
And as long as he believes that, or acts asif he believes that, then he can look in the
mirror without screaming and there’s norecognition whatsoever of precisely the sort
of game that he’s involved in, so he hasit both ways, right?
He can do everything terrible that he alwaysdreams of doing and consider himself not only
good but good even at a higher level thanthe people that he was actually afflicting.
And of course, that’s just standard descriptionof what happened in the Soviet Union.
Nietzsche says, I love this, his definitionof morality, it’s the most cynical thing
Nietzsche ever said, I think: “the idiosyncrasyof decadence with the ulterior motive of revenging
oneself against life successfully.
I attach value to this definition.”
He said: well, why be an ideologue?
Well, it’s a good way to simplify the world,right?
It’s a procrustean bed, you just chop offeverything that doesn’t fit, then you don’t
have to think, right?
So that’s good because thinking is difficultand it’s troublesome and it takes courage
and so forth to transform chaos into orderis no trivial matter.
And if it’s all ordered for you, well thenthere’s really nothing left for you to do.
But then Nietzsche goes even below that.
He says: yeah, well there’s more to thestory than that, isn’t there?
It’s like once you got this little procrusteanbed all arranged for your enemies, then you
can allow your most base, vengeful instinctsfull flow by just continually chopping people
so they fit.
And you do it, all the while saying: well,it’s obviously the best thing that could
possibly be done.
And so then you look at Stalin, say, becausenot everybody who’s adopted a vengeful tack
on existence is sort of like the archetypeof vengefulness or adversarial spirit.
But you get now and then the people like Stalin,who are good counter-examples, say, to the
people like Gandhi.
And so Stalin’s very instructive and sowe could start by looking at what he did in
the Ukraine.
So at the end of 1929, the Kremlin decreedthat millions of peasants from individually
owned farms would be forced into agriculturalcollectives or kolkhozes seen in the eyes
of the politburo as pliant providers of Sovietagricultural needs.
In defiance of the facts, Soviet ideologistshammered out an appropriate Marxist terminology
to explain what was going on.
Throughout grain-producing areas, it was said:resistance to this scientific scheme was being
organized by so-called rich peasants or Gulaks.
With his customary brutality, therefore, Stalindecreed the liquidation of the kulaks as a
classWell, Stalin liked this idea of like group
guilt, that was a major theme for Stalin.
That meant I really didn’t have to pay attentionto you as an individual.
I could just decide if you were a doctor orengineer or a kulak or a German or whatever
ethnic, racial or educational division happenedto characterize a particular target at the
time.
And it didn’t matter if you were guiltyas an individual.
That whole notion never even obtained.
It was class guilt that mattered and if youwere in one of those classes, well we’re
better without you.
And of course, the nature of the class justchanged constantly.
But it was a perfectly logical thing to thinkif you believed in like historical determinism.
If your parents were rich bourgeois, whatwas the probability that you’re going to
be a useful part of the workers’ collective?
It would be easier just to get rid of youahead of time so you didn’t cause too much
trouble.
So then you think about these kulaks, richpeasants, well who were these people?
Like when we get down to the individual level?
So you go in a village, the village was fullof serfs, like not 40 years before, so these
are people just struggling out of the feudalsociety,
right?
And you got some people in there who’vemanaged to be successful enough as farmers,
which is no easy thing, to like have a houseand maybe hire one person.
And you know maybe have a little extra foodin the larder and a few kind of material possessions.
So these are successful people and so youcould say: well, they’re the ones that actually
knew how to farm.
That’s one theory.
Or you could say: the reason they had allthis stuff was because they stole it from
all the other people, right?
And then you think: OK, so I march into town,I’m a Soviet revolutionary and I say: hey,
guys, you know those rich people, they stoleeverything they have from you.
And then you think: OK, which of you guysis going to listen to that?
Well, it’s not going to be the sort of strugglingpeople just underneath them, who are really
trying to get ahead, right, because that’swhere they’re hoping to get.
It’s going to be the resentful and revengefulfew who think: well, the world’s fundamentally
unfair and it’s obvious that those sonsof bitches got what they want from stealing
it form me and here it turns out that if Ijust go down the street and steal it back,
well, not only am I allowed to do that but,according to this new emergent ideology, man,
that’s the best thing I could possibly do.
So then multiply that story by several millionparticipants and you have like the first five
years of the Soviet empire.
And so what do we have there?
The result was a catastrophic onslaught onmillions of peasant households.
At first, party activists and local officials,read bullies, right, brutalized peasants,
forcing them to surrender their homesteadsand their possessions.
Deportations, arrests and killings soon followedas terror generalized.
The violence mounted to full-scale rebellionin various places, with regular troops engaged
for months.
For example, suppressing peasant uprisings.
Resistance took various forms, usually reflectingthe hopeless, desperate anguish of a doomed
population.
In the Ukraine, there were even women’srebellions, spontaneous uprisings of peasant
women who attacked the local Kolkhozes todemand the return of confiscated farm products.
With a colossal impact on the Soviet economy,peasants slaughtered their animals by the
millions rather than see them seized.
For two years, the fighting raged.
As the dreadful process of de-kulakizationcontinued, Stalin ordered a further assault
on the recalcitrant peasantry.
What Conquest calls the terror-famine of 1932.
Moscow, writes Conquest, it’s from a bookcalled The Harvest of Sorrow, knowingly decreed
grain procurements from the Ukraine and elsewhereexceeding by far what the local population
could produce, right, which meant that everyonewho lived there was forced and ordered to
deliver more grain than they had ever grown.
Communist brigades roamed the countrysideforcing agriculturalists to disgorge the little
they had been able to produce under conditionsof severe dislocation.
Grain sat unused in state reserves while thelocal population starved.
This is from Wisdom, apocryphal Biblical writings:for the reasoned unsoundly saying to themselves:
short and sorrowful is our life and thereis no remedy when a man comes to his end and
no one has been known to return from Hades.
Because we were born by mere chance and hereafterwe shall be as though we had never been because
the breath in our nostrils is smoke and reasona spark kindled by the beating of our hearts.
When it is extinguished, the body will turnto ashes and the spirit will dissolve like
empty air.
Our name will be forgotten in time and noone will remember our works.
Our life will pass away like the traces ofa cloud and be scattered like mist that is
chased by the rays of the sun and overcomeby its heat.
For our allotted time is the passing of ashadow and there’s no return from our death
because it is sealed up and no one turns back.
So a piece of writing thousands of years oldand so Nietzsche says at the end of the 1900s:
well, rationality undermines our faith inreligion.
But we have a piece of writing from more than2,000 years ago that says: look, what is it
about being alive?
It’s short and there’s nothing to it,right?
Our thoughts are biologically produced andwhen we die there’s nothing left.
Well, that’s a very modern thought yet itwas expressed thousands of years ago so you
know, I think, merely from observing thatthat the crisis of faith that characterizes
modern society is a reflection of the permanentcrisis of faith that characterizes human beings.
and you say: well, what’s happening withthe totalitarian?
Well, the totalitarian is afraid of the unknown,for good reason, I mean and he’s very interested
in sustaining his own belief structure.
And the combination of those two things, itcan start off trivially is that the more you’re
convinced that you have to maintain the stabilityof your current belief structure, the more
afraid you are of anything that’s unknown.
And the more afraid you are of anything that’sunknown, the less likely you are to go out
and explore.
Then the less likely you are to go out andexplore, the weaker you get because you stop
gather information.
And then the weaker you get, the more necessaryit is that you have to have this frame of
reference and it has to remain intact.
And this sort of thing starts to cycle andcycle.
So you undermine your own sense of your ownautonomy and ability and you make yourself
more and more a rigid tool of the propagandisticsystem.
And you more and more adopt a sense of enmitytowards anything you don’t understand.
And that’s a spiral that goes rapidly downhill, right, rapidly into a state that’s
characterized by complete internal chaosAnd I think that’s a good definition of
what is meant in metaphysical language byhell, right?
Hell is a bottomless pit.
Why?
Well, I don’t care how bad things are foryou or around you, there’s always some bloody
thing you could do to make it worse, right?
There’s always some suffering you can extendto others, there’s always some bit of stubbornness
or rejection that you can pull off that willmake your already terrible situation worse,
right?
So there’s no bottom and that seems to meto be right.
If you do just a cursory historical analysis,no matter what terrible account you can come
across with regards to, say, concentrationcamp brutality, in some other book there’s
some worse story.
Like limited only by the absolute ends ofthe most brutal form of imagination, all a
consequence, I think, of this process, right?
And you can’t really say what causes itbecause on the one hand, there’s cowardice
and lack of faith, right?
Anything I don’t understand – cowardice,pride and lack of faith.
Anything I don’t understand doesn’t exist,plus I’m not the person to confront it anyways,
right?
That’s the lack of faith.
Each of those things feeds into the otherand it’s very difficult to say where it
starts.
And the thing that’s kind of interestingabout these self-referential processes is
that they don’t have to start dramatically.
Like the loop can start very, very small andit picks up speed very, very rapidly.
So you imagine you’re speaking into a taperecorder and the speaker’s on.
You get too close to the speaker with themicrophone and you get some feedback.
And if you bring the microphone a little closer,the feedback develops more and more intensely.
It can blow up the whole system.
It doesn’t have to start dramatically tomove forward very, very rapidly.
And what that means, at least in principle,is that even small mistakes anywhere along
this circle can start the development of preciselythis kind of spiral.
And so you say: well, people, do people needto be abused to become totalitarian?
Well, and the answer to that is no becauseeveryone’s been abused sufficiently by some
occurrences in their life to justify takinga negative tack on the nature of experience.
You say: well, how cowardly do you have tobe in order to run away from things?
And you think: well, not that cowardly becauseunder most circumstances your life is characterized
by sins of omission, right?
It’s there are things you left undoneand like just exactly how rigid do you want
your belief systems to be?
And you say: well, I like them to be stablebecause without that stability, then I’m
terrified.
And then you can say: well, fair enough butthat’s all a sign of a kind of existential
weakness.
And then if social circumstances come aroundand give your life a good tweak, say like
they did with the Germans prior to World WarII, you just never know what side you’re
going to end up on.
And so all these little tiny mistakes youknow, mistakes that I think are marked by
your own conscience, are precisely that, leadsyou down this terrible path.
And if you think: well, no, that can’t beright – well, then you have to remember
that in these processes, say, of de-kulakizationand the immense wave of death that characterized
the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany, most peoplewere involved.
And if they weren’t involved in direct actsof commission, they were absolutely involved
in direct acts of omission, right?
They knew but they didn’t say anything.
Well, classically sins of commission are regardedas much more evil, say, than sins of omission.
But I actually think that’s backwards.
The sins of omission are worse because everytime you walk away, I mean what do you do?
You walk away from a Nazi, what are you walkingaway from?
Well, we know what you’re walking away from,right?
If you’re walking away from a domain that’slikely to expand into something that’s completely
undifferentiable from hell, and it’s nowonder you walk away from that, but the fact
that you walk away from it makes it much morelikely that it’s going to happen
So then I think, to end this, something likethis.
We look for economic reasons to explain greatterrible acts, right?
We look for social reasons, we look for politicalreasons but we have Nietzsche’s observation,
which is something like this:I don’t care whether or not your life’s
been characterized by suffering and deprivation.
The mere fact of suffering and deprivationdoes not allow you to draw a particular conclusion.
You can’t say that there’s a causal pathbetween economic deprivation, say, and the
rise of a totalitarian state because any eventis susceptible to multiple interpretations.
Well, how do these states come about?
Well, I think: well, we look for politicaland economic and social reasons because that’s
the easiest place top look, right?
If you ratchet up the level of descriptionto social forces that are beyond your control,
then you never have to worry about what itis that you’re doing or not doing that’s
actually causing this sort of thing.
But I think if you look at the historicalrecord, especially if you look at it from
a mythological perspective, the story is basicallyclear and it goes something like this:
Every time you make a mistake that you knowis a mistake and you don’t fix it, the world
moves more towards that.
And it might be trivial, maybe, but it mightnot be.
So you look at Adolf Eichmann, for example,and he’s a little bureaucrat who planned
the Final Solution and you find out he’sjust a little ratty guy, right?
You see him in a bar, you don’t even noticehim, he’s a negligible nobody.
But he’s the guy who planned the Final Solution.
He was a normal person, I mean maybe evenslightly less than normal, right?
He is no monster, he wasn’t the sort ofperson you’d remark on if you saw him.
Precisely the opposite: invisible, quiet,unassuming, presuming no doubt, at least until
he was arrested, that he was just doing whathe was told and that was just fine.