Just to define some terms:
I would describe fulfillment as "a state of having your set of basic human needs met."
Creativity, conviviality and physical health, nutrition, sexuality,
if you don't get them you don't survive very well, and so, if we don't have them we feel some sort of agitation,
and if we do have them we feel fulfilled. 
Then I would define a next term, which is well-being.
And well-being is "both the sense and the reality of being able to achieve fulfillment in a consistent sustainable way."
Well-being is what we are actually trying to accomplish.
What we mean by jobs, I believe, and this is not perfect but it's good enough to work with, is: 
"The system that we use to provision individual well-being, in a fashion that is generative of collective well-being." 
Now, to make that concrete, it's: "I work to be able to get the things that I think I need to be able to live well.
By so doing, I contribute my skills and energy to some collective, from which you are able to draw, for your particular individual wellbeing, 
provided that you also contribute your skills back to this commons.
That's what we're trying - that's what this sub-function is.
Now, somewhere around the 1600's, we hit upon an approach to try and do a good job of that. And it worked really well.
So the neo-liberal capitalist system in fact substantially increased the well-being of people around the world, compared to where it was before.
The notion that there, what is it - "There is no better system?" That was probably true. I don't know but it probably was true.
That's no longer the case.
So we no longer are in a circumstance where we have to use a system that we know is designed to create winners and losers,
because we are in a circumstance where simultaneously we can create a system where there are no losers, and we must.
The constant process of competition, and development and struggle that was implicit in the genius of the previous system has led us to where we are right now.
That doesn't work anymore. There's lots of good reasons to explain why it can't possibly work anymore,
I'll reference a gentleman named Joseph Tainter and 'The Collapse of Complex Societies' as a categorical explanation for precisely why it can't work anymore.
But we can be more simple: Our system has provided a western standard of living for about 40 percent of the population,
the other 60 percent of the population is living on around a dollar a day.
So, if they want to move up to even ten dollars a day, guess what happens to all of our ecosystems?
So we can draw lots of reasons why the current way of doing things can't continue.
Ok, so let's deconstruct that. What are we trying to accomplish? Well, as we discussed with jobs, what we are trying to accomplish is:
"Some system, whereby we can provision individual well-being in a fashion which is generative of our collective well-being."
So that you can figure out a way to live the best life that you can while simultaneously not inhibiting my ability to do that, or anybody else's ability to do that. 
In fact ideally, in a way that causes us all to level up.
The short answer is to take into account some really powerful fundamental of what happened in the late sixties and early seventies.
Up from the beginning of life, up until the 1960s and 70s, the primary problem was the extraction and distribution of fundamentally scarce or fundamentally rivalrous, depletable goods. 
The kinds of things that, if I have them, you can't have them. And if I've used them, they are gone forever.
So we know that information is the sort of thing that is not rivalrous in nature.
Once I've invented Calculus, I can just give you Calculus and you basically get it for free, and then you can build something on top of it.
So you get this "Whooahhh!" What we've seen in the past hundred years.
I can make it try to seem rivalrous by using patent and copyright, 
the reason why we treat information as a rivalrous good is because we have an economic and legal model that can deal with rivalrous goods, that can't deal with non-rivalrous goods.
What we're seeing is that there is clearly a generalized move within the existing economy towards organizational structures that are more 'affordant' to non-rivalrous generativity. 
The movement from the industrial machine model, where laborers engaged in mindless, repetitive tasks, 
all the way through, say, Hewlett Packard, Yahoo, to Google, is in fact a movement of the progressive discovery of the productivity,
of increasingly creating things that are in alignment with non-rivalrous techniques.
The old model was one that had winners and losers. I call this the carrot-and-stick model.
The carrot-and-stick model is: "If you play the game well, and you give the best value, put all your work into it, then you'll get rewarded heavily.
And if you don't, you'll get punished." 
Now, in a timeframe where we didn't actually have enough rivalrous goods to go around, so somebody was going to go without,
then, that was both a necessity - who was going to go without? "Well, at least we will pick the ones who didn't contribute the most."
Ideally, obviously it never actually worked that way.
And also, it turns out that if I punish you for not contributing and reward you for contributing, I get more contributions so more of us get more stuff.
That's the old model.
It turns out that that model is actually inhibitory to the kinds of things that are non-rivalrous. So creativity isn't just not motivated by carrots and sticks,
it's actually destroyed by carrots and sticks. 
The things that enable creativity are mastery, meaning and autonomy:
Provision circumstances in such a way that you have the capacity to achieve autonomy, mastery and a sense of meaning.
Which is going to be personal and collective, because that is the way that human beings are wired.
Now if that is the case, what we see is that is in fact optimal for generating non-rivalrous goods.
Now this is very optimistic, because what that means is that things are starting to get into alignment.
The things that are necessary for human beings to achieve fulfillment turn out to be precisely the sorts of things that maximize our generation of non-rivalrous phenomena.
It turns out that they also maximize our ability to coordinate with each other.
Coordinating with each other generates an increase in the production of non-rivalrous phenomena.
We know that non-rivalrous phenomena have this exponential growth rate, and that each time we get a level up,
we dramatically increase our capacity to provision the rivalrous goods that are at the bottom of Maslow's hierarchy. 
So we get this nice feedback loop, that if we shift into increasingly non-rivalrous modes,
we get increasing escape velocity, where we are constantly rewarded for getting better and better at detaching ourselves from a commoditized environment,
and better and better at attaching ourselves to a well-being economy.