I think of all the stories that we've investigatedso far, all the fundamental myths of creation
that we've investigated so far, the two thatwe're going to talk about in detail today
are probably the two stories that have hadmore impact on the course of world history
than any other two.
I'm going to talk in some detail today aboutthe story of creation laid out in Genesis
and also the story of the Buddha's enlightenment.
Both stories are also characterized by a kindof depth that's virtually elimitless.
And I think in some ways that the topics we'regoing to discuss today are the most enlightening
of all the many ideas that we've traveledthrough so far in this series.
So, we're gonna be concentrating on an analysisof this schema again.
The idea being here of course that the worldof experience, which is the world that mythology
is attempting to describe has these fundamentalconstituent elements, one associated with
chaos or nature or the unknown, one associatedwith culture or the great father or the predictable.
And another associated with the archetypicalson, the individual who's the offspring of
the interplay of these two fundamental forcesBut given that part of the purpose of this
series is to elucidate the causes of war andmotivation for war, attention paid to the
dualistic nature of the individual is of,of paramount importance.
So we could say that just as nature has it'sterrible side and just as culture has its
terrible side, so the individual has his orher terrible side.
And the depth of that, capacity say for atrocityand vengefulness is just as deep as the depth
of terror that the unknown itself holds.
I think this is a difficult, a difficult factfor normal individuals to grasp, given that
we're highly motivated to view ourselves as,if not precisely good, at least as relatively
harmless.
But the evidence that as individuals we arerelatively harmless is very, very thin indeed.
And I don't think it's possible to understandthe depth of motivation for atrocity and social
conflict without coming to terms with thecapacity for evil that's characteristic of
the individual.
Now both the story in Genesis and the storyof the Buddha's enlightenment, lay bare in
many ways the nature of the structure of individualevil.
And also not only it's structure, but itsmotivation.
Why it is that people would turn more or lessvoluntarily away from the good and embrace
what can only be described as it's polar opposite.
So in addition to making reference to thisstructural schema of course, we're also going
to be discussing it's, the typical mode ofinteraction of these elements of experience.
You may note for example that this diagramwith which you're now very familiar, the notion
of order, chaos and reestablishment of orderalso parallels the structure of the story
in Genesis, the creation where human beingsare created first and exist in a paradisal
state.
That that paradise is disrupted as, as a consequenceof some, some event of virtually cosmic significance,
that as a consequence of that disruption peopleare destined to live a profane existence in
constant wait for the next state of order.
So just as this is a fundamental archetypicalstructure so that fundamental archetypical
structure is, constitutes the, the basic grammarfor this story in Genesis.
Now what we're gonna do to begin with is todescribe precisely how this idea of paradise,
descent and the search for paradise is illustratedsymbolically in Genesis and exactly what those
symbolic representations mean.
The idea here being that the reason that theauthors of Genesis, the multiple authors of
Genesis extending over thousands and thousandsof years chose those symbols as not because
they were labouring to be obscure or not becausethey were establishing a pre-empirical representation
of reality, a kind of quasi scientific representation,but because these symbols have an elusive
or metaphorical richness that enables a story,although short to be characterized by an almost
infinite depth.
That's part of the reason.
The other part of the reason is that whenyou say something profound, you say it using
the language, the clearest language that youhave access to.
And if the story is almost unutterably profound,then the images in which it is enshrouded
are almost incomprehensibly complex.
It has to be that way because if the targetof the investigation is reality itself, something
so complex that we cannot conceptualize itfully, then the language that we use to represent
that reality has to stretch us to the limitsof our ability to understand
and it is the case that the story in Genesissay as much as the stories of Buddhist enlightenment
constitutes an artistic endeavor on the partof the human race to portray the nature of
human reality and to explain the behaviouraland philosophical consequences of that reality.
That being a tall order perhaps we shouldforgive the multiple authors for only being
able to manage it in a way that's essentiallyimagistic and dramatic, rather than explicit,
logical, philosophical and fully developed.
So the first thing I'd like to point out toyou is to, is a statement made by Eliade,
which I think is one of the most enlighteningthings I ever read.
Now, the first thing that Eliade does is describethe universality of flood mythology.
But then he puts a twist on it.
So the idea behind flood mythology is somethinglike this, if societies deviate from an emergent,
a necessarily emergent kind of morality, akind of morality that takes the viewpoint
of all the inhabitants of a given societyinto account, if a society deviates from that
viewpoint sufficiently, it dooms itself toannihilation.
That annihilation being represented mythologicallyas the flooding of the society by the precosmogonic
waters, the primordial element or chaos.
So societies that are tyrannical doom themselvesto eradication by chaos, a simple equation.
But made more complicated by Eliade, his observationthat more than one factor plays a role in
the establishment of the tyranny.
On the one hand there's straight degenerationof cultural presuppositions in that if you
establish a state or a game, which has particularrules, because the environment is constantly
transforming itself, the rules by necessitybecome out of date.
So merely as a consequence of the progressionof time, the presuppositions on which any
state are founded tend to become less andless relevant to the current environment.
Okay.
So there’s this aging and senility merelyas a consequence of thermodynamic processes.
But then Iliad also points out that there'sone additional factor which has to be attributed,
not to society, but to the individuals thatmake up that society, which is that the strictures
and rules on which society was founded canbe constantly and carefully updated when necessary,
If all the individuals that make up that societyare perfectly willing to confront exemplars
of emerging chaos in their own lives whenthose exemplars emerge, which is to say that
it's perfectly reasonable to be guided inyour personality by the structures of your
state.
But if you face something unknown that thoserules cannot handle, it's a moral necessity
and obligation on your part to face that emergentanomaly forthrightly to solve it if you can,
and then to communicate the consequences ofyour solution to the rest of the members of
your society.
Now what Eliade points out is that the individualwho, who removes him or her self from the
responsibility of confronting their own anomalyspeeds the process by which the state decays.
So the decay of the state and the possibilityfor the emergence of chaos is an interaction
between the tenancy of the state to disorder,the tendency of the state to, archaism and
senility merely as a consequence of changeand the voluntarily the voluntary unwillingness
of the citizens that comprise that state toface the unknown courageously when it confronts
them.
So Eliade says: that the deluge myth, delugemyth is almost universally disseminated.
It is documented in all the continents, althoughvery rarely in Africa probably because of
the relative shortage of water.
And on various cultural levels.
A certain number of variants seem to be theresult of dissemination, first from Mesopotamia
and then from India.
It is equally possible that one or severaldiluvial catastrophes gave rise to fabulous
narratives, but it would be risky to explainso widespread a myth by phenomena of which
no geological traces have been found.
That majority of the flood myths seem in somesense to form part of the cosmic rhythm.
The old world, people by a fallen humanityis submerged under the water and sometime
later a new world emerges from the aquaticchaos.
In a large number of variants the flood isthe result of the sins or ritual faults of
human beings.
Sometimes it results simply from the wishof a divine being to put an end to mankind.
The chief causes lie at once therefore inthe sins of men and the decrepitude of the
world.
by the mere fact that it exists - That is,that it lives and produces - The cosmos gradually
deteriorates and ends by falling into decay.
This is the reason why it has to be recreated.
In other words, the flood realizes on a macrocosmicscale what is symbolically affected during
the New Year festival.
The end of the world and the end of a sinfulhumanity in order to make a new creation possible.
So then the question might arise logicallyenough, what is it that would motivate an
individual to work to avoid anomaly when itemerges in his or her own life.
And to risk an eventual flood.
And even more profoundly, what would motivatean individual perhaps to work for the antithesis
of order, to work to promote the emergenceof chaos, since we know that people are relatively
ambivalent in their moral stanceIs it possible that we can create a compelling
motivational story for the desire of the individualas such to work against the emergence of the
good rather than for it.
So let's take a look at what Genesis saysabout the creation of experience.
So first of all, remember we're taking a phenomenologicalstance on this story, which is to say that
this story is not an objective retelling of,of materialistic emergence.
It’s something more specifically dramatic.
It describes the nature of human experience.
Okay?
The nature of conscious human experience.
And in fact the creation story of Genesislays explicit stress on individual consciousness
literally as a precondition for being itself.
Which is to say that underlying the storyof Genesis is the notion that without whatever
consciousness is, there would be no segregatedentities and therefore no being.
So this is one manner in which Genesis attemptsto put human beings at the centre of the cosmos,
so to speak, which is the idea that the worldindependently of consciousness, whatever that
world is absolutely needs to be reflectedby consciousness in order to exist in any
sense that existence could reasonably be defined.
First chapter:"In the beginning God created the heaven and
the earth.
And the earth was without form and void.
And darkness was on the face of the deep."
Now, the idea that the earth was without formand void takes us back to the [13:48:55] Mesopotamian
creation myth and because the word for void,the Hebrew word for void is “Tehom”.
And “Tehom” is a word derived from Timat.
And the void, the chaos that constitutes theunformed condition of the cosmos prior to
the elaboration of being is assimilated tothe same category as Timat, which is this
terrible unformed and frightening aprioriccondition that has to be courageously confronted
in order to manifest itself as being.
"And the earth was without form and void anddarkness was on the face of the deep."
So now you see another, another interplayof opposites here between matter and water,
the primordial elements.
So first of all it's heaven and earth.
And then it's earth and water and, and theheight and the deep.
And the spirit of God moved upon the faceof the water.
So another opposite: that interaction betweenspirit and whatever it is that the precosmogonic
water or chaos constitutes.
"And God said let there be light.
And there was light.
And God saw the light, that it was good.
And God divided the light from the darkness.
"
And then a prototypical division between light,which is associated with illumination and
enlightenment and consciousness because we'reconscious during the day.
And the sun and life that emerges nested insidethis, the initial opening lines of this sentence.
Northrop Frye notes that there's tremendousemphasis on the notion of a repetitive cycling
of days and nights in the opening sentencesof Genesis, even though from a formal perspective
this emphasis is paradoxical because the notionof the day emerges before the creation of
the sun.
And Fry's point is not that this is some carelessgesture on the part of the people who authored
Genesis.
But more that it's an attempt to emphasizethe idea of a cyclical relationship between
consciousness and light and darkness and chaosand to highlight the idea that this cyclical
relationship is somehow absolutely vital tobeing itself.
So Genesis one five says "and God called thelight day and the darkness he called night.
And the evening and the morning were the firstday "
Frye says "... the central metaphor underlyingbeginning is not really birth at all.
It is rather the moment of waking from sleep.
When one world disappears, a world of virtualityand potential, and another comes into actual
being.
This is still contained within a cycle.
We know that at the end of the day we shallreturn to the world of sleep..."
and that's a notion that has a metaphoricalresonance because there's the sleep that punctuates
periods of consciousness.
And then there's the great sleep at the endof life, which is characterized by the complete
cessation of consciousness.
We know that at the end of the day we shallreturn to the world of sleep.
But in the meantime there's a sense of self-transcendenceof a consciousness getting up from an unreal
into a real or at least more real world.
This sense of awakening into a greater degreeof reality is expressed by Haraclitis as a
passing from a world where everyone has hisown logos, into a world where there's a common
logos - experience that we all share.
"Genesis presents the creation as a suddencoming into being of a world through articulate
speech, which is another aspect of logos"logosincorporates the idea of creative exploration,
And then the formulation of the consequencesof that exploration in verbally communicable
categoriesRight?
Which give our, give our aspects of our beingtheir defined boundaries and parameters and
enable us to establish a shared mode of socialbeing- through articulate speech conscious
perception light and stability.
Something like this metaphor of awakeningmay be the real reason for the emphasis on
days and such recurring phrases.
"And the evening and the morning were thefirst day", even before the day as we know
it was established with the creating of thesun
The most fundamental pair of conflicting andcyclically interacting pairs of opposites
that is portrayed in Genesis is essentiallythe pairing of chaos versus order, chaos versus
generative order.
And a poem by F.I Tiuitchev expresses thisidea extremely well and very powerfully.
So I'm going to read it to you.
When sacred night sweeps heavenward she takesthe glad the winsome day.
Unfolding it,rolls up it's golden carpet that had been
spread over an abysmal pit.
Gone vision like as the external world.
And man a homeless orphan has to facein utter helplessness naked, alone
the blackness of immeasurable space.
Upon himself he has to lean with mindabolished, thought unfathered in the dim
depths of his soul he sinks.
For nothing comesfrom outside to support or limit him.
All life and brightness seem an ancient dreamwhile in the substance of the night
unraveled, alien, he now perceivesa faithful something that is his by right.
Um, absolutely brilliant poetic statement,I think.
Laying out very nicely, very richly the, thefundamental nature of the existential paradox
that constitutes human life.
Pointing to a very profound sense of futilityand fear.
But then beyond that to the notion that inthe depths of the unknown, in the depths of
the darkness and in the depths of all that,that's fundamentally unfaceable, there still
lurks something that can be discovered givensufficient courage.
Another fundamental division portrayed indirectlyin Genesis, the word versus chaos.
So what you have in genesis is an absolutelystellar idea.
I think perhaps the most fundamental contributionof archaic Jewish thinking to western and
world civilization, which is that althoughit is easier in some ways to consider the
actual matrix of things, their material substrateas the strata from which they emerge, it is
equally reasonable and perhaps more pragmaticallyuseful to note that things only exist because
of the interaction between the logos, theword that characterizes consciousness.
And whatever this matrix is.
So in Jewish thought and then Christian thought,and of course in thoughts of that sort echoed
throughout the world, there's the idea thatconsciousness associated with the transcendent
directly associated with the deity is actuallythe thing that in interaction with this matrix
give, gives rise to being.
Genesis plays a stress, places stress on thisnotion of the internal logos, the individual
consciousness in two very complex ways.
It first says that it's the word of God, thelogos of God that gives, that gives order
to chaos and makes being emerge.
But then even more particularly it's the,it’s the self-conscious logos of individual
humans, their capacity not just to see theworld as an object.
But also to see themselves as an object thatgives the world the particular value slant
that it has for us.
which is to say that not only are we in aworld where the subject and the object are
separated.
And, and therefore experience and suffer theconsequences of that separation-But even more
particularly we are the only creatures whoare so conscious that we can observe ourself
as objects.
And the consequence of that is that becausewe've extended our consciousness to ourself,
we're capable of conceptualizing things thatother creatures cannot conceptualize.
Such as the infinite possibility that laysmanifest of the unknown but also the fact
that as individuals we're subject to our finitelimitations, right?
That we can become diseased.
That we can become mentally ill.
And that finally we'll die.
And so the idea here is that something likethe extension of logos to the object, to the
subject has made human existence finally problematic.
And genesis refers to this as essentiallythe heritable sin of Adam.
Because we're aware of our own vulnerabilityas a genetic consequence merely of being human.
There's a transformation in the nature ofexperience that has essentially cosmic significance.
Lao Tzu in the Tao Te Ching makes a commenton the formless chaos that constitutes the
matrix of things, the origin of things inthe following manner.
He says "there was something formless yetcomplete that existed before heaven and earth
without sound, without substance.
"This is the void or the chaos.
"Dependent on nothing, unchanging all pervading.
Unfailing.
One may think of it as the mother of all thingsunder heaven."
The idea here being that whatever experienceis in the absence of a delimited human consciousness,
is something that’s outside the boundariesof time.
Because time -temporality is a human attribute.
And it's outside the boundaries of spatiallimitation because only human beings with
their delimited and fixed size can attributespatial aspects to being itself.
So whatever it is, is that exists withoutus, is so comprehensive and so complete and
transcends temporal dimensions to such a greatdegree that it can't be conceptualized as
being at all.
It’s something that transcends being tosuch a degree that it's not even nameable
but still exists as "the mother of all thingsunder heaven".
Now Genesis formally associates the humanbeing with logos.
And this is a determinative move in humanhistory just as the Mesopotamians first hypothesized
that their emperor was equivalent to Marduk,the force that confronted Timat and carved
her into pieces and made the world, and justas the Egyptians conceptualized their pharaoh
as the intermingling between Osiris, the stabilityof the state and Horus the exploratory hero.
And then disseminated that identity down thearistocratic levels, closer and closer to
the individual, individual.
So the ancient Hebrews said, “and God saidlet us make man in our image after our likeness.”
Now, it could be said that the logical derivationof that statement is that god looks like human
beings.
Or conversely that God is an old man witha beard.
But it means something I think that's moresophisticated than that.
Which is that the central aspect that's associatedwith this transcendent deity, the logos, which
is the thing that gives rise to order as aconsequence of it's confrontation with chaos
is also the thing that centrally characterizeshuman consciousness.
And so with that there's this transcendentnotion that inside each human being is a spark
of genuine divinity.
And it’s the manifestation of that divinityin human temporal and spatial parameters that
literally keeps the cosmos generating.
"So God created his, man in his own imagein the image of God created he, him.
Male and female created he them and let themhave dominion over the fish of the sea and
the fowl of the air and over the cattle andover all the earth and over every creeping
thing that creepeth upon the earth.
"
Now fundamentalist Christians read this asan injunction, right?
This is what human beings should do, dominateall other living things.
But it's more like a description, which isthat the consequence of the embeddedness of
this spark of divinity in the individual isprecisely what gave rise to the human ability
to dominate the planet.
Which is an ability that at least at the momentseems fundamentally unparalleled, with no
limit in sight.
So it's not an injunction so much as a cold-hearteddescription.
There's a very profound idea underlying thenecessity of the creation of the individual
human being.
Here's a line of archaic Jewish speculationthat runs something like this:
Why is the creation of a limited subject necessaryif God's omniscient and omnipotent and omnipresent?
Why would he bother creating anything outsideof himself?
And the line of speculation runs like this.
The one thing that a being that is completein all regards even all hypothetical regards
lacks by necessity his limitation.
And as a consequence of that anything that'sabsolute is not complete and can't be complete
without limitation.
And so there's an emergent idea in Genesis.
And most notions of the emergence of humanconsciousness that the absolute needs the
reflection point of a delimited being to actuallyspring into some kind of defined actuality.
So that being itself becomes an interplaybetween the necessary limitations of the finite
and the transcendent reality of the absolute.
And so being is something that emerges becauseof the fact as another ancient Jewish tradition
has it, God and man are in a sense twins,mutually dependent on one another for their
defined being.
From such a perspective, being has the samenature as a game.
When you're playing a game you have to playby rules.
Which means that there are things that youcan do while playing the game.
But there are many, many things you can'tdo.
And that the game could not exist withoutthe limitations.
Also predicated on the idea that the imposition,the Nietzschian idea that the imposition of
limitations on a structure actually givesrise to the possibility of diverse new forms.
Which is also a very sophisticated way ofconceptualizing the world.
So from the perspective of Genesis, the individualis the locale of the experiential drama.
And the fact that the individual is limitedis a necessary precondition for being.