Well, you might as well start by writing down that URL. Well, you might as well start by writing down that URL.
 Before get out of class ends, I will give you time again. I'll show it to you again at the end of class.
 That's where the syllabus is.
 The course summary basically contains The syllabus will tell you
 Pretty much everything you need to know about the class.
 This course has a textbook The... there's a text.
 This is it. This is it.
 It compiles key chapters in many books. It consists of readings from a larger text.
 Although this book is very old, but I use it because it's old, but
 Because a lot of the theorists that we are going to talk about are also old...
 So it is very suitable for reading materials...and so I found this particular text accurate.
 And many of the people that we're going to talk about are very...
 Have very sophisticated views of personality.
 So if you don’t read some of the same advanced articles And I think that it does you a disservice
 It may be difficult for you to understand the essence of it unless you read something that's sufficiently sophisticated.
 But if you read, at least you can So that you actually understand, at least to some degree,
 Roughly understand their thinking what the people that we're going to study were talking about.
 We may also start from the definition of personality. We might as well start, I suppose, with a definition of personality.
 But it's hard to define something that's that general because...
 Because when you're speaking about human beings,
 It's not that simple to figure out
 Distinguish personality from other what constitutes personality and what constitutes something else.
 So I will cut into the discussion from a few perspectives
 At the same time and while I'm doing so...
 I would like you also to consider
 The nature of what you're going to learn.
 Human personality is, essentially, unfathomable.
 Human beings are unbelievable complicated
 And the social environment we live in is equally complicated, and we're nested in systems that are also unbelievably complicated.
 There are more patterns of connections in the human brain
 The number of neural connection patterns between neurons in your brain than there are
 There are subatomic particles in the universe. There are more subatomic particles in the universe.
 Much more by a substantial margin.
 You can look up Gerald Edelman if you want to find out about that.
 So it's reasonable to say And so it's not unreasonable to point out that
 You're the most complicated thing we know of
 It's much more complicated by many orders of magnitude.
 And the probability that you can understand yourself
 Or the probability of having any overall cognition is very low and anything approaching totality is extraordinarily low.
 So this makes the study of personality something
 It is daring and hopeless and complicated.
 We will discuss a lot of theorists Now, we're going to cycle through a very large number of theorists...
 You will find...and what you'll find is that
 Although there are commonalities between them,
 Their theories are still very different, there are marked differences.
 You might think And so then you might ask yourself...
 Uh Well...
 If these theorists hold their own words What's the point of studying...
 Then learn these theories one by one...this sequence of theorists and ideas if...
 What's the point...there's no point of agreement between them?
 My answer is And I would say first:
 First of all, they still have points of agreement between them.
 Although...
 Personality hasn't advanced to the point,
 There is no one yet where I would say that we have a...
 Undisputed unified theory...homogeneous theory that's free of internal contradictions.
 But I would also say that...
 Personality is a multi-field discipline...personality is a hybrid discipline.
 It's partly science...
 It's also about engineering...but it's partly engineering.
 From a clinical point of view, I think personality science is more like engineering. The clinical element of it, I would say, is more like engineering,
 And the job of an engineer is to construct things and what engineers do is try to do things.
 They follow the theory They try to make something happen.
 Put ideas into action and they are informed by theory.
 But the point is still to build something.
 And when you're working as a clinical psychologist,
 1/3 to 1/2 and most of the initial theorists that we'll discuss, for the first...
 All belong to clinical theorists... little more than a third to a half of the course, are clinical theorists.
 They're trying to build something.
 But they're dealing with very very difficult...
 Conceptual problems, because...conceptual problems, because...
 They are trying to cure mental disorders...they're either trying to cure mental disorders
 Or maybe even unhappiness...
 Also trying to regain health for patients...and trying to bring about health...
 But the problem with that is that...
 From a scientific point of view, it's not a straightforward thing
 We can't exactly define mental illness to define a mental disorder from a scientific perspective...
 Because of mental health...because what's healthy, mentally, and what's not...
 One part is social judgment...is partly social judgment.
 One part is socially constructed...and it's partly socially constructed.
 And it partly has to do with norms...
 One part has to do with ideals...and it partly has to do with ideals,
 As you might say because you might also say that...
 A healthy state is a normal state...to be healthy is to be normal.
 You might also say that health is an ideal state. But you could also say that to be healthy is to be ideal.
 And then, of course, you run into the problem
 You need to conceptualize what an ideal state is of having to conceptualize an ideal.
 But actually And it isn't self-evident
 Science cannot form the concept of'ideal' well that science is capable of conceptualizing an ideal...
 Because ideals belong to the field of moral judgments... because ideals tend to fall into the domain of moral judgments,
 Or philosophical judgments rather than scientific judgments say, or philosophical judgments rather than scientific judgments per se.
 So what I would say to you is that...
 It would be worthwhile to approach this course
 Please imagine yourself as an engineer of the human spirit as if you were an engineer of the human spirit.
 An engineer of your own spirit, to begin with...
 When you start communicating with others...but also an engineer of the spirits of other people...
 You will also be the engineer of the soul of others...because, as you interact with other people...
 Because inevitably you tell them what you want and what you don't want...you inevitably tell them what you want and what you don't want.
 When they give you what you want and what you admire...
 You respond positively to them,
 You pay attention to them, you smile at them, you focus...
 You focus your thoughts on them, you interact with them.
 You will also because of their behavior, And you reward them...
 And give them rewards...for acting in a particular manner,
 And when they don't respond the way that you want,
 Then you punish them...
 You will show an unhappy expression, alienate this person or reject their friendship...with a look or by turning away or by rejecting their friendship or,
 If you were a child, you would refuse to play with them when you're a child, by refusing to play with them.
 That's why And so...
 We're engaged in the co-creation of personalities, our own and others...
 This brings us back to the previous question...and that also brings up the same question:
 What is it that we are all collectively trying to be and trying to create?
 I believe that you all have realized your shortcomings in front of your ideals. I suspect that you all have the experience of falling short of the ideal
 Whether this ideal is proposed by you or by others...an ideal that you hold for yourself or an ideal that other people hold for you.
 I believe that you all
 I have felt the negative consequences of falling short of that ideal.
 Freud’s theory is that Freud would conceptualize that
 When the super-ego imposing its judgment on ego,
 You being the ego,
 The super-ego being... a hybrid, I suppose, of...
 Are external factors...external forces
 And your internalization of those judgments and forces.
 For the personality itself I think Now, personality per se, I would say...
 It has these ideal elements...has these elements of ideal...
 There are structural elements...and has structural elements as well,
 In the second half of the course we will discuss these more and we're going to talk about those more in the second half of the class.
 The structural elements can be lined up and outlined more scientifically.
 The second half of the class concentrates more on physiology
 Brain physiology—brain physiology
 And on statistical approaches to the description of personality.
 You might think that what I just mentioned is the approximate course category Um... I suppose you might say that that outlines the territory.
 The full name of this course is "Personality and Its Transformations" because The course is called Personality and Its Transformations, because...
 We have personalities—that's who you are now
 But our personalities are also capable of transformation, of change.
 Obviously we understand transformation as the result of learning. I mean, obviously we think about that as learning.
 It can be the learning of factual knowledge Um... some of that might be regarded as factual learning...
 It can also be and some of it might be regarded as
 Learning how to perceive and behave.
 At the beginning of the course we will And I would say that
 The clinical psychologists that we'll cover, to begin with,
 More concerned...are much more concerned with
 The nature of the implicit structures that shape your perceptions,
 The essence of those invisible structures...and also the implicit structures that shape your behaviors
 And how they're integrated in relationship
 To your negative emotion health and well-being,
 Relatively the scholars we will meet in the second half...whereas the thinkers in the second half are more concerned about...
 Will directly list those structural elements...laying out the structural elements of those features
 And relate them to underlying, say, mechanistic phenomena,
 They will assume...making the assumption, which seems warranted,
 Your personality and the mode of operation of your brain that there's some relationship between your personality
 Closely related and the manner in which your brain functions.
 I'm going to try to provide you with a meta-narrative
 That will help you to unite these different theories.
 I've often found it useful when I'm trying to remember something
 Use stories to connect facts to have a story to hang the facts on,
 Otherwise you can only...otherwise you're faced with
 Memorize the necessity of doing nothing but memorization, and...
 And I think...it isn't obvious to me that
 Memorization does not allow you to acquire real knowledge. memory actually constitutes knowledge.
 Um...
 What constitutes knowledge is that
 Generation of a cognitive structure that enables you to...
 To help you live a better life...conduct yourself more appropriately in life.
 In other words, a course in psychology And so I suppose you might say that a course in psychology—
 You could argue that a course in psychology, especially in personality,
 Is a course in applied wisdom as well,
 If wisdom is to a certain extent...assuming that wisdom is, in part,
 Is to understand yourselves, so that you don't—
 You can reduce it a bit—so that you don't present
 Too much of an intolerable mystery to yourself,
 You can also understand others better...and also to understand others so that you can...
 To predict their behavior...predict their behavior,
 And understand their motivations...understand their motivations,
 Negotiate with them...negotiate with them,
 Listen to them,
 Cooperate with them...and formulate joint games with them,
 From this you can better...so that you can integrate yourself reasonably well
 Integrate into the lives of others into the family and society with another person and with a family and in society.
 The structural elements of personality might be regarded as Well, the structural elements of personality might be regarded as
 The implicit structures that govern your perception, the implicit structures that govern your perception,
 Implicit structure...and that tilt you towards certain kinds of behaviors.
 I can give you some examples
 We can talk about the big five model just briefly.
 The big five personality model is a statistical model,
 In the second half of the course which we'll cover in detail, trait by trait,
 We will explain each personality trait in detail...partly during the second half of the course.
 The way that the big five was generated was that...
 It was proposed about fifty years ago...its trait been generated over about fifty years...
 Personality psychologists are first...that personality psychologists gathered together adjectives
 I tried my best to collect within the English language first that
 All the words describing people in English were used to describe human beings,
 How many are collected...as many adjectives that they could collect,
 Then factor them...and then subjected them to a process called factor analysis,
 In short, factor analysis is to determine by statistical methods...and what factor analysis does is enable you statistically to determine...
 Similarity between different adjectives...in some sense how similar adjectives are to one another.
 For example, So, for example,
 If you gave a thousand people a list of adjectives
 Let them describe themselves to describe themselves with,
 One of the adjectives is happy...and one of the adjectives was happy
 Another of the adjectives was social,
 You will find those who think they are happier...you'd find that those who rated themselves high on happy
 Would also rate themselves high on social,
 And those who think they are less happy...and those who rated themselves low on happy
 Would also rate themselves low on social.
 And by looking at those patterns of co-variation, you can determine...
 What are the basic dimensions of personality...what the essential dimensions are of human personality.
 One of the dimensions is roughly happiness.
 That's extraversion.
 Another dimension is neuroticism. It's a negative emotion dimension. It's a negative emotion dimension.
 So, if you ask someone if they're anxious,
 They score high on a scale of 1 to 7, and they score high, say, on a scale of one to seven,
 Then their another scale number is likely to show.. they're also likely to score high on another item
 They are sad that says that they're sad.
 In fact, bad emotions clump together. And it turns out that negative emotions clump together.
 And so that people who experience more of one negative emotion
 There will be a higher tendency to have all bad emotions have a propensity to experience more of all of them.
 There's another dimension called agreeableness.
 And agreeable people are self-sacrificing,
 Compassionate, and polite.
 If you're dealing with an agreeable person
 Then they don't like conflict, they care for other people.
 Um, if you're dealing with an agreeable person,
 They tend to put your needs ahead of their own needs, they're likely to put your concerns ahead of theirs,
 They don't like competition and have a cooperative spirit...they're non-competitive and cooperative.
 Uh, it's a dimension where women are—
 Women score more highly than men on agreeableness across cultures,
 Even in terms of equality...including those cultures where the largest steps have been taken
 The very progressive social environment is the same, towards producing an egalitarian social circumstance,
 Like Northwestern Europe...like Scandinavia actually.
 The gender differences in personality there
 Bigger than other places are larger there than they are anywhere else.
 Um...
 Another dimension is conscientiousness. Another trait is conscientiousness.
 Conscientiousness is an excellent trait if you want to do well in...
 Strong work especially...in school, and in work,
 Especially if you're a manager or an administrator.
 I can't say we understand a lot
 Very comprehensive but about conscientiousness, although it...
 No matter in which country the adjective molecular analysis is performed...it reliably emerges from factor analytic studies of
 It will continue to appear adjective groups across different countries.
 Conscientious people are diligent, industrious, and orderly.
 By the way, their orderliness will shift their political views to the right. The orderliness tilts them towards political conservatism, by the way,
 Because of your natural temperament... because it turns out that your in-built temperament,
 And your in-built personality,
 Will automatically filter the world you see... which constitutes a set of filters through which you view the world...
 Will also adjust the way you process information... also alters the manner in which you process information,
 This affects your thinking when you vote...and influences the way that you vote.
 And so you might say, and I do believe that this is true,
 Because over the years we have done a lot of related research...our—we've been doing a lot of research on this as of late:
 That is, the more accurate a measure you take of someone's political beliefs,
 The more you find that personality is what's predicting them.
 And I agree with this point of view because you think about it, and I think that's a reasonable thing to think about, because, you know,
 You have to—you have to figure out ways of simplifying the world,
 After all, one person can't do everything right, because you just can't do everything.
 And so, people are specialized.
 Everyone has their own domain. They have specialized niches that they occupy.
 You could think about them as social niches.
 A niche is a place where your particular skills in that small social field
 Your skill will keep you alive, would serve to maintain you.
 If you are very outgoing, you will actively look for a social niche. And so if you're extraverted, you're going to look for a social niche,
 Because you like to be around people...because you like to be around people.
 And if you're introverted,
 You're going to spend much more time on your own.
 For example, an introverted person, and so, if you're an introverted person, for example,
 You're gonna want a job where you're not selling,
 Because you don't want to be in the crowd...and where you're not surrounded by groups of people
 Catering to those who need you to use social etiquette who are making social demands on you all the time,
 Because it will wear you out.
 And if you are very extroverted, that's exactly what you want. Whereas if you're extraverted, that's just exactly what you want.
 In the eyes of extroverts, the world is full of social opportunities. And so the extravert sees the world as a place of social opportunity.
 And for the introvert, they just want to and the introvert sees the world as a place to
 Retreat from and spend time alone.
 These two lifestyles are reasonable and it turns out that both of those modes of being are valid,
 The problem is...that the issue, at least to some degree
 Is whether or not you're fortunate enough...
 To match your temperament with the demands of the environment.
 And I suppose also whether you're fortune enough—fortunate enough—
 So that you're born in an era
 This era has an exclusive field where you can be useful where there is actually a niche for your particular temperament.
 Not everyone is so lucky because it isn't necessarily the case that that will be the case.
 Imagine that all of these temperamental dimensions
 Will change because of evolutionary pressure, right?
 The degree of extroversion of different people forms a normal distribution. So there's a distribution of extraversion, a normal distribution.
 Most people are somewhere in the middle and then as you go out
 The fewer people are distributed, the extremes there are fewer and fewer people.
 That is to say in a very wide time range And what that means is that, on average across large spans of time,
 Every position on that distribution...there have been environments that
 The corresponding environment has appeared match every single position on that distribution,
 But most of the environments are still close to the middle position.. with most of the environments matching the center,
 Otherwise we wouldn't have evolved that way.
 So sometimes being really extraverted is going to work well for you
 In a minority of environments—a minority of niches,
 But sometimes this personality can be a disaster...and sometimes it's just going to be a catastrophe.
 For example, if you were born in a tyrannical society, I suspect, for example, that if you live in a tyrannical society,
 Where any sign of...
 Performance...of... of... of...
 The signs that you are inclined to personal activities may bring you trouble...personally oriented activities likely to get you in trouble,
 Extroverted and neurotic...that being extraverted and low in neuroticism
 It might not be very beneficial because wouldn't be a very good idea, because...
 You will love to talk about it and be lively...you're going to be mouthy and happy and saying a lot of things,
 Unable to keep your thoughts to yourself,
 You will also be relatively fearless...and you're going to be relatively fearless.
 Now, I don't know that for sure,
 Because we haven't done the studies that
 To accurately match temperamental proclivity to environmental demand,
 But you should understand what I mean...but you get what I mean.
 So...
 Conscientious people, anyways—
 Conscientious people are industrious and orderly.
 We know a little bit about orderliness.
 Although it sounds strange, it seems to be associated, strangely enough, with disgust sensitivity,
 But it's not that surprising...which I suppose isn't that surprising, you know.
 You take an orderly person, and you put them in a messy kitchen,
 They will definitely feel disgusted...they respond with disgust
 I just want to hurry up and want nothing more than to
 Straighten it all out and organize it and clean it
 There are many types of orderliness, and there's tremendous variability in orderliness.
 Um...
 I said before that orderliness predicts political conservatism and as I said, orderliness predicts political conservatism.
 It's not the only thing, but it's certainly one of the things.
 Um...
 The correlation between conscientiousness and grades is about 0.4.
 That's about sixteen percent of the variance.
 It's the second best predictor of university grades after intelligence, it's the second best predictor of university grades after intelligence,
 In this course, we will also discuss IQ... and we'll talk about intelligence during this course, too.
 Relatively speaking, IQ is a relatively straightforward concept. Intelligence is actually a relatively straightforward concept.
 I don't think I'll get into it today, but...
 Conscientious people—they're industriousness—they're industriousness
 Being organized will make them plan their time well, and their orderliness makes them schedule their time,
 So they make efficient use of their time.
 They use schedules and that sort of thing.
 We haven't been able to figure out anything about
 The underlying biology or psychology of industriousness.
 We've tried, really, dozens and dozens of tests,
 Trying to find a laboratory measure on which a diligent person will have excellent performance...attempting to find a laboratory measure on which
 But we failed completely. Industrial people do better, and we failed completely.
 And there's no animal models of industriousness, either.
 And so, I would say it's a great mystery that
 An unsolved mystery remains at the heart of trait psychology.
 Um...
 Maybe it's a human-specific category, you know, I mean,
 Maybe you would say that sled dogs are diligent...you could think of sled dogs maybe of being industrious, and maybe—
 Or maybe sheep dogs and animals that work like that,
 But after all they have undergone human training but of course they've been trained by human beings, so...
 And the diligence of animals is not the same as that of humans...but, it isn't obvious that animals are industrious the same way we are.
 I mean, industriousness involves sacrificing the present for the future.
 Something like that.
 This also means you have to be able to and it seems like you have to be able to
 The ability to understand the concept of time can conceptualize time in order to sacrifice the present for the future.
 Speaking of diligence, I would recommend you One of the things that I would recommend that you do as students,
 As a student of this course, in this course,
 But this applies to every course... and maybe in every course, speaking of industriousness, is:
 Come up with a plan of attack for the course,
 And use a scheduler, you know.
 If you treat your university career like a full-time job,
 You're much more likely to succeed, and,
 If you keep up on the readings,
 Keep writing essays and all other exercises and you keep up on the essays and all of that,
 Then you will not fall into the course progress...then you're much less likely as well to fall into despair
 I won't feel too desperate when you get too far behind...
 Using a Google Calendar or something like that
 To organize a schedule for the entire semester...
 This move at the beginning of the semester will benefit you a lot...at the beginning of the semester can be invaluable,
 Especially if you're not very industrious,
 Because it can keep you on track,
 And one of the things we know about industrious people is...and one of the things we know about industrious people
 Is that they are very good at using schedules,
 And at planning the use of their time,
 Of course I hope you all become smarter...and so, I would like to say that you should all be smarter,
 But I don't know how you could be smarter.
 We don't know anything about how to improve intelligence,
 For improving diligence...and, I suppose we don't really know anything
 We also know nothing about how to improve industriousness, either,
 But I can tell you that people who are industrious
 Come up with a strategy for problems that will be encountered in the future...
 Actively develop strategies...for solving the problem that's ahead of them,
 And do their best to stick to the strategy, and then they do whatever they can to stick to the strategy,
 So if today or tomorrow...and so, for example, if you sat down,
 You spend a few hours sitting down today or tomorrow, for a couple of hours—
 Use Google Calendar or other...three hours—and you filled in a Google Calendar
 The schedule tool you use—whatever you happen to use—
 Develop a learning strategy with a strategy for studying,
 Mark the due dates for all your assignments and exams and a list of when all your assignments are due and all of that,
 And the study time you plan for them...and when you're going to sit down and study
 Then you won't be in the position where you have to crammed for
 Ten hours a day, hopelessly, right before
 Embracing the Buddha's feet in despair...you know, important exam
 And holding the Buddha's feet is a very inefficient learning method...it's also very ineffective way of studying by the way
 I mean, first of all people who cram for ten hours
 Although they claim that they have been studying crazy for 10 hours, they are not really continuing to study say they're studying for ten hours, but they rarely are because, well...
 I can't study for ten hours
 I don't have the power of concentration that
 High concentration of attention for so long would enable me to do that for that prolonged period of time
 I can manage about three hours of intense intellectual activity
 Then I ran out of energy before I'm pretty done
 Also if you study and sleep and it's also the case that if you study and than sleep
 Sleep and learn again, learn again and sleep again, spread the learning away and than study and then sleep, you space it out
 It’s easier for you to remember what you learned
 It's also much more likely that you're much more likely
 To remember if you try to recall the material.
 It’s useless to highlight and so highlighting and that sort of thing isn't very useful
 Read carefully and then close the book, but reading, closing the book, summarising what you've read
 Don't peek at this is useful without opening the damn book, that's useful.
 Because this way you are exercising the ability to remember and the reason for that is that you're practising remembering.
 And that's what you really need to exercise and that's what you have to practise.
 If you're practising memorisation, you have to practise remembering.
 Instead of repeating memorization mechanically, you don't just go over the thing over and over;
 That'll help you with recognition memory, some,
 But it won't help you with recall memory.
 Back to the topic The last character trait is Anyways, the last trait is openness.
 Openness is a creativity trait.
 It's also associated with intelligence, in that intelligent people
 Specifically, I mean IQ and I'm speaking technically of IQ,
 People with high IQ have higher creativity. It’s nothing surprising. tend to be higher in, tend to be more creative, which is hardly surprising,
 By the way, creative people are more likely to be liberal politically, by the way.
 They like unique styles, they like aesthetics, they like novels, they like novelty, they like aesthetics, they like fiction,
 They like movies, they like art, they like poetry.
 There's something about them that grants them an aesthetic sensitivity.
 And that's an inbuilt trait.
 It's not the case, by the way, that everyone's creative.
 In fact, a small number of people are creative. In fact, far from it.
 We've used the Creative Achievement Questionnaire to--
 To measure people's creativity,
 I will talk about this part in the class later and I'll talk to you about that later in the class.
 And the Creative Achievement Questionnaire
 Takes thirteen dimensions of creativity from 13 dimensions -
 For example, writing, dancing, acting, scientific investigation, so, you know, writing, dancing, acting, scientific investigation,
 Entrepreneurial activity, architectural activity,
 Cooking...
 There's a handful of others... singing, etc...
 All in all, you know, the sorts of things that
 You would assume that people could be creative about -
 People need to rate themselves on a scale from 1 to 10 and then it asks people to rate themselves on a scale from 1 to 10
 On their level of achievement with regards to all those creative domains
 0 means I have not received any training in this area, nor have any attainments with zero being "I have no training or proficiency in this area,"
 The result shows that 70% of people and 70% of people score zero
 There is no cross the entire Creative Achievement Questionnaire for a creative project.
 A tiny proportion of people are outliers, way out,
 At the same time have made achievements in multiple creative fields and they're creative in many dimensions simultaneously.
 And have a high degree of creativity Exceptionally creative.
 And this phenomenon you will find It turns out, as you'll find out,
 That that pattern, which is called a Pareto distribution,
 Where most people stack up at zero
 And a few people are way out on the creative end
 Characterizes all sorts of distributions,
 For example, wealth like the distribution of money, for example.
 Which is why 1% of the people
 Have the overwhelming majority of the money.
 It's a different 1% across time.
 It is floating It churns.
 And you're much more likely to be in the 1%
 The more likely you are to squeeze in that 1%, which is reasonable if you're older, logically enough,
 Because one of the things you do
 You will trade youth for money as you age is you trade youth for money.
 If you're fortunate.
 I don't think the trade is fair but it may be the best case. I don't think the trade is really worth it, but that's the best you've got.
 So back to the topic So, anyways...
 Those particular traits,
 You can think of those as ways that you simplify the world, right?
 There's lots of different places that you can act in the world,
 There's lots of different ways you can look at it and survive.
 That's why you can be a plumber, and a lawyer,
 There are lawyers, engineers, etc. and an engineer, and those all work, right,
 Even though they're very different modes of being.
 People can have different personalities, and survive,
 As long as you're capable of
 Finding the place where your particular filters and behavioral proclivities
 Match the demand of the environment.
 And a large part of the so-called successful adaptation refers to this. And a huge part, I would say, of successful adaptation is precisely that.
 Personality also contains other elements. Now there are other elements of personality too.
 I have a different view on one of the elements. One of the elements I've been struck by;
 This is what I mean to psychoanalysts and clinicians, and this is actually one of the criticisms
 I have about the psychoanalysts and the clinicians in general,
 Of course I still admire them (even though I have great admiration for them and would say that,
 Their theories are also worth listening to what they have to say is very much worth listening to),
 But I don't think that personality is inside you. is that, it's not obvious that your personality is inside you.
 You know, you think,
 You know, a human being is a strange multilevel thing.
 For example, you might ask yourself, and you might ask yourself, well for example,
 Is your mother a more part of you than your arm?",
 Or maybe even more precisely,
 Is your child more a part of you than your arm?".
 Certainly, people will do drastically self-sacrificing things
 Let the children live to maintain the lives of their children.
 So as a person and so you're-you're a person
 You are made up of many small parts and you're made up all sub-sort of subcomponents of a person,
 None of which you can seen when you look at a person.
 All the complicated machinery inside you
 That makes you who you are, and then
 And outside of that of course,
 You're nested in all sorts of complex system
 So you're part of the family, and-and you're part of a community,
 The community belongs to the province, the province belongs to the country and that's part of a province, and that's part of state, and that's part of...
 Belongs to an international consortium of states,
 Belong to an ecosystem and that's part of an ecosystem,
 And how you make a distinction
 .With such a complex link between you and the systems that
 It is also very difficult to distinguish the system environment, you're embeded in is also of extraordinary difficulty.
 One of the things you have to do as a clinical psychologist, for example,
 If you're trying to diagnose someone with depression,
 You think oh, this person is dreadfully unhappy...you think "Well, this person is dreadfully unhappy".
 Well, you can think about that as a problem
 With their psychological adjustment-
 You know, the way that they're looking at the world.
 But if you look at the...
 Epidemiological information...epidemiological literature,
 For example, one of the things that you find is that very many people...
 After suffering a major blow...have a first depressive episode
 Depressive symptoms that have never occurred before will appear after something genuinely terrible has happened to them.
 For example, they lost their loved ones or were seriously injured Right? They've lost someone or they've become injured or...
 Or unemployed...or they've become unemployed
 Because unemployment is a terrible shock to people...
 It's actually hard to judge...and it's not precisely self-evident that
 You can consider someone who's unhappy and desperate
 Is it because he lost his job or is he depressed-because they no longer have a job-depressed.
 They're certainly sad and they're not doing very well, but...
 Because there is no fixed income...the fact that they no longer have an income...
 Will have a dramatic practical impact on people... is actually something with dramatic practical consequences,
 But treating that as if it's a mental disorder seems to be...
 It is often counterproductive.
 It's also the case, for example...
 If someone comes in to you, to talk to you, and they're very upset and
 And show anxiety disorder...they may manifest the signs of, say, an anxiety disorder
 Or symptoms of depression or, again, depression or other...
 Or other clinical features...other clinical features, for that matter,
 Cough...ahem...
 Then you may need to analyze carefully...you have to do a careful analysis of the manner
 The family environment he is in in which they're embedded in their family because,
 This is also when we talk about Freud later...and this is something that we'll talk about quite...
 Will discuss in depth...thoroughly when we come to discussing Freud, is that,
 You know that not all families are well, you know, it's not like everybody's families are necessarily,
 Particularly happy places to be.
 You know, i mean...
 Human beings are very dependent.
 We have a very long period of dependency, partly because...
 Our cerebral cortex is very developed we're so cortically hyper-developed that
 It takes a very long time to program us into something that's...
 Vaguely capable of maneuvering on its own, and...
 This makes us form a close family bond that produces, of course, the very tight familial bonds that we all...
 This is something we all desire deeply...that we all desperately require,
 After all, who wants to be alone in the world because-who wants to be alone in the world?...
 But at the same time...but it also...
 It also exposes us to the probability of becoming entangled into...
 Causes in generations of families...even multigenerational family pathology
 At least as far as I know...and it isn't obvious, always and certainly hasn't been to me
 When I've seen my clients
 Their fundamental problem does not lie in themselves that the fundamental problem with the client, is the client
 It lies in Sometimes, the fundamental problem is...
 Their family...is the family.
 And the reason why the patient is considered to be the source of the problem and perhaps that person has been identified as the problem person.
 It's rather convenient for everyone who's involved
 This assumption is the most convenient to make that presupposition.
 It's also the case that,
 This is the Freudian idea fundamentally,
 This is the Oedipus idea that
 It's very easy for
 People to become over dependent on their parents
 Or parents’ spoiling has caused the child’s over-dependence and, and for the parents to facilitate that,
 And therefore for the individual and then for the primary developmental problem
 The primary growth issue for the individual,
 In fact to become free of interfering elements of the family
 And make yourself independent individuals so that they can exist as independent individuals
 Of course there are cultural differences and then of course there are cultural variations in that,
 This also makes this theory complicated that make that proposition complex,
 But overall this is the basis of Freudian psychology but, that's a fundamental tenant, say, of Freudian psychology.
 A lot of
 The clinical psychologists,
 And all the psychologists we have contacted all of whom, that we're going to study,
 The viewpoints held are very westernized. have a pronounced western orientation.
 One of the fundamental presuppositions is that
 Part of the hallmark of positive psychology development
 A feature positive psychological development
 Is the creation of an individual that's capable of acting
 Individuals capable of acting independently, and that's
 I think this idea is implicit in I would say an implicit ideal
 That lurks at the bottom of the clinical presuppositions of all classic psychologists
 Of all the theorists that are classic Npsychologists.
 This is a very old picture.
 The picture is Jonah emerging from the whale. It's Jonah emerging from the whale.
 It evolved from It's a variant of a,
 A legend a myth.
 One about The myth is,
 The dragon myth, I suppose.
 The dragon myth is that there's a dragon
 It lives under the ground that's eternal,
 From time to time it will come out of the ground to threaten the world and now and then it rises out of the ground to threaten the state.
 Every time someone in the world will take the initiative to stand up and someone within the state determines
 To go confront the dragon voluntarily, and does so,
 And bring back the treasure from the dragon and then brings back something of great value.
 The hero is generally male,
 Sometimes the thing of great value
 Is the female that the dragon has kidnapped,
 That’s a St. George story,
 Sometimes the warriors brought back gold and silver jewelry, and sometimes it's gold and other treasure,
 That was interpreted as a story of the Hobbit like in the story of the Hobbit.
 A story that you all know very well.
 It's a classic hero story,
 And this hero story is also and the hero story is another fundamental element
 A basic element of the clinical theories, I would say.
 This theory believes that it's predicated on the idea that you learn
 The things that make you afraid or disgusting through voluntary contact with that
 You will gain something that frightens or disgusts you.
 This is also the characteristic of psychoanalytic theory And that's a hallmark of psychoanalytic theory.
 Carl Jung, who we'll discuss in detail, said
 His classic saying is (Latin) in sterquiliniis invenitur his primary dictum was “in sterquiliniis invenitur” (Latin),
 Ignore my fake Latin pronunciation which I am sure I'm massacring because it's Latin.
 It means: What you are looking for is hidden in the most unsightly place. But it meant “in filth it will be found”.
 And one of the characteristics of clinical theory is And one of the hallmarks of the clinical theories
 Is that within the confines of everyone's experience,
 This experience can be actual social experience and you can think about this as experience out in the world
 It can also be your subconscious travel or experience in the unconscious mind,
 There are dirty little secrets, let's say,
 There are skeletons and dreadful, old fears and skeletons and dreadful, old fears
 There are traumas of abuse and memories of pathological behavior and remnants of abuse and memories of pathological behavior
 And the growth and failures of courage that leave you undeveloped,
 It may be due to escape. Perhaps out of avoidance.
 And that the psychoanalytic process
 Is precisely the careful encounter with the forgotten and suppressed part of myself
 Those forgotten and repressed elements of the self,
 In the hope that a clear encounter will redeem them,
 Unite them with the remainder of your personality,
 To make yourself stronger and make you stronger in consequence.
 I think this is also a kind of and I would say that's just a variant
 Of the manner in which human beings learn,
 When we talk about Piaget, we will have a more in-depth discussion and we'll talk about this more in relation to Piaget, because
 You always learn when you're wrong.
 Although this is very annoying.
 So what do you learn when you're correct?
 You're walking in the world, you're operating in the world.
 You have a sense of what you want to have happen.
 You are through "what you want to happen" You're always looking at the world
 Come to see the world through this sense of what you want to have happen.
 Your every move is trying to achieve what you want to happen. You're acting so that what you want to have happen will happen.
 And when it happens, then you're happy.
 Because first of all you get what you want, and that's good, maybe,
 Depending on what you want.
 Secondly, if your behavior helps you realize your wish, but it's also good because if you get what you want when you act,
 This means that your model of behavior is correct, then it turns out that your model of how to act is valid, right?
 Because you got what you want The outcome that you get what you want indicates no error
 It means that your model is correct on the part of your model.
 But it's very frequently the case that,
 When you act to get what you want,
 You don't get what you want.
 It's very unpleasant because you can't get what you want and then, that's unpleasant, because you don't get what you want,
 But it's even more unpleasant because
 Your failure means it brings with it the hint of a suggestion
 The way you understand the world that the manner in which you're construing the world
 Is incorrect at some indeterminate level.
 So for example, if you tell a joke at a party,
 You presume that people will attend,
 Suppose they will laugh when they hear it and then when they hear the joke they will laugh.
 But if you tell the joke and it goes flat, or even worse,
 Even feel sick or offended disgusts and offends people,
 Then you will be surprised. Then you're going to be taken aback.
 And that's partly because you didn't get what you want,
 It feels bad and that's not so good,
 But what’s worse is that you find the way you understand the situation but it's more because there's something wrong
 There is also a mistake with the way you conceptualize the situation.
 And then you're faced with a problem,
 An unknown domain emerges before you and the problem is the emergence of a domain of the unknown.
 You will wonder where did I go wrong Well what kind of mistake did you make?
 Maybe you're not as funny as you think you are.
 This is a big problem. That could be a big problem.
 Maybe you're not around people
 It's not the same as I think. Who are the way you think they are.
 Maybe they don't like you as much as you thought they liked you.
 The potential for various paranoid thoughts appear in your mind
 One is more serious than the other of increasing severity to come welling up at you
 Even if you make a small social mistake in a situation where you make
 You will also think of various possibilities even a trivial social mistake is quite broad.
 And when you make an error of that sort,
 You have to face it and sort through all the possibilities
 So that you can find out what it was you did wrong
 And find ways to improve and how to re-tool it so that in the future
 You don't make the same mistake.
 And that requires in some sense
 Carry on a what you might describe as a journey
 To the journey into the belly of the beast,
 [Beast of the beast] the beast being that place where things have fallen apart
 Where you're overwhelmed with negative emotion
 Facing chaos, you are confused and chaos and confusion.
 That's a very old story.
 That's the story of the journey to the underworld.
 And the hero is the person in the story
 Who makes the voluntary journey to the underworld
 To collect what's been languishing down there,
 This is the main theme of psychoanalytic theory and that's the basic motif of psychoanalytic theory.
 From a certain perspective, this is also the main theme of clinical practice. I would say it's the basic motif, in some sense, of clinical practice.
 One of your tasks as a clinician is because one of the things you do as a clinician
 Find out what people are afraid of and what they're avoiding—
 This may exist in the patient’s past, present or future and that can be in their past or in their present or in their future—
 Break it down into smaller pieces,
 Help patients develop strategies for approaching or controlling them and help them devise strategies of approach and mastery.
 And that improves the quality of their personality,
 Will also help them avoid and helps develop them into people
 Who won't make the same mistakes over and over again.
 So why do we need so many theoretical tools? Alright, so, why is this plethora of tools?
 I said before, in some sense being a personality psychologist
 Is like being an engineer.
 You're trying to build better people.
 For example, if you are a carpenter or a mechanic, you might say that if you're a carpenter or a mechanic
 Then your ability to fix a vehicle or build a house
 Is dependent on your proficiency
 The proficiency of various tools with regards to the use of a multitude of tools.
 It can be said that the more tools you can master, then you might say that the more tools you have at your disposal,
 The more likely it is that you're going to manage things properly.
 So in this course So what I would like to offer you
 What I want to teach you is is the possibility that what you're going to encounter
 In this course is a series of sophisticated conceptual tools
 They can help you understand yourself better,
 Live better in this world and therefore better orient yourself in the world.
 I regard this course as intensely practical,
 Because I believe and that's because I believe that you
 Have nothing to rely on in your life that's
 The most crucial thing to help you succeed more crucial to your success as you move through life
 It is your own character and personality than your character and your personality.
 Your character and personality affect you at any time that's what you bring to every situation,
 When getting along with others and with yourself and the more sophisticated you are
 The more experienced you are in relationship to yourself and others,
 The more you understand people
 The more you understand the nature of your own being,
 Then the more likely it is that you're going to proceed through your life
 The more you can live happily in a manner that will make you pleased to exist
 Rather than displeased to exist.
 The reading list of this course contains many articles I've collected the writings of people
 Written by someone I think is unmatched that I regard as of incomparable brilliance.
 They're difficult to understand.
 The concepts are complex.
 But it's not surprising,
 Because this subject is complex and vital because the subject matter is complex and vital.
 So you need to work hard and so it requires work,
 To do your best and I would say try to keep up on the readings,
 Complete every reading if you would.
 This will make you a lot richer in this course. It's going to make the course much richer for you.
 And I would say,
 Cuz people often ask me how should I read for this course?
 There's so much material to read'Cuz there's a lot of reading.
 My answer is to read them as if it matters. And the answer is: read as if it matters.
 That's the right answer.
 Don't be thinking about how it's going to be tested.
 If you do the readings and you come to the lectures then
 Then the tests aren't particularly difficult for you.
 But the key is that you should pay attention to those readings
 Think of them as if the person is writing about you.
 And you should try to understand what the person says,
 Because they can also be your tools because it's another tool for you to use.
 In the face of patients And I would say, well, with my clients
 I use the approaches of one theorist for one client
 Use different theories on different patients and the approaches of another theorist for another client,
 To a certain extent it seems to me to depend on some degree
 It depends on the patient's own temperament actually on the temperament of the client.
 For example, those I've found for example that people
 Who are very high in openness,
 That is to say those who are creative which is the creativity dimension,
 They are quite amenable to a Jungian approach.
 But for those who are more practical, conscientious,
 People with low experience openness, behavior therapy will be more effective low in openness, are much more amenable to a behaviorist approach.
 We don't really know enough about psychology yet
 Can’t match every temperament and treatment to match treatment to temperament,
 I just talked about my experience but those are some of the things that I've experienced.
 Okay, practicalities.
 Well, there's a website.
 I just gave you the URL, I'll put it up at the end of class. I gave you the URL, I'll put it up at the end of class.
 The URL lists all the readings that aren't in the textbook.
 In other words, there are classic readings in the textbooks,
 From Jung Freud Piaget readings from people like Jung and Freud and Piaget, and so forth.
 Rogers wait Rogers.
 I chose this book because And as I said, I picked that particular textbook
 I believe that the author did a very credible job
 That is, summarizing what's very difficult to summarize.
 And those articles in the website So, and then also on the website there are links to papers,
 Because much of the more modern material
 Related to neuroscience that pertains say, to neuroscience,
 And also to trait personality,
 You are going to read those first-hand materials I think it's better to just read the original papers
 I will also do a detailed interpretation during class and I'll detail them out with you as we go through.
 Those articles can make you familiar with that'll also give you some familiarity
 Original psychological papers with original psychological papers.
 Just as the saying goes Which are, again—there's an idiom
 Gewuzhizhi that you have to master in order to understand them.
 You can practice more but you might as well practice,
 Especially if you want to go deeper in psychology it is especially if you're interested in continuing with psychology
 Such as being an educator or a psychologist in your educational practice or as a career.
 It's good to get accustomed to it.
 You can remember this URL. So there again is the URL for the class.
 jordanbpeterson.com If you go to jordanpbeterson.com,
 This URL should not be difficult to remember which isn't too hard to remember
 Assuming you can remember my name,
 On the left side of the page you can find a list of courses, then classes are listed on the left hand side.
 You can just find the syllabus there.
 These are what we will learn. Oh so here's what we're going to cover.
 Today is mainly for course introduction and overview Today, obviously, this is the introduction and overview.
 Class is a little strange this year because
 Because it's one hour at a time, and the next two hours, one day it's an hour and the next day it's two hours,
 So I don’t know exactly what to do for the time being, so not exactly sure how we're going to negotiate
 But we will figure it out our way through that but we'll figure it out.
 Historical Perspectives: Mythological Representations.
 I told you I'd try to provide you the meta-narrative
 That might enable you to link the theories
 We will learn the theories that we're going to talk about together,
 So I will describe a kind of so I'm going to describe to you
 What you might regard as a conceptual language.
 What I can say at the moment is As far as I can tell, it's that: imagine that there are
 Imagine that there are two kinds of things that you need to know.
 And I think this is a fact I believe this to be the case.
 You need to know what the world is made of, I believe you need to know what the world is made of,
 I suppose that's the proper domain of science.
 But then you need to know how to act.
 This is totally another field. And that's a whole different thing.
 And you need to know how to act,
 It's the thing you need to know most of anything.
 After all you are a living creature because of course you're a living creature,
 Action in relationship to desired goals
 To you is life is everything to you.
 You can think about that from a Darwinian perspective;
 You have to act at least so that you can survive,
 At least so that you can find a partner.
 That's life!
 So one question is So part of the question is:
 If you imagine the world as a place of action how does the world look
 What will it look like in your eyes if you think about it as a place to act?
 And the answer isn't:
 The world is full of worthless things a place of value-free objects.
 That's not what the world looks like,
 In a world where everything is worthless, you can’t act in a world of value-free objects
 Because there's no way of choosing between them.
 If everything has zero value,
 How could you choose this and not that why would you choose one thing over another?
 You live in a world where things
 Present themselves to you as of different value,
 This partly depends on your temperament and that's partly a consequence of your temperament,
 Partly depends on other reasons although that's a consequence of other things.
 So what I'm going to try to do is to provide you in the next course
 A framework that describes the world of morality with a schema that describes the world of morality,
 Roughly speaking, a framework for a code of conduct is roughly speaking, which is how to act.
 I will also tell you a little bit about what I think the language is from Darwin's theory,
 Definition of language which I think was derived from Darwinian processes,
 I think logically speaking those clinical theories and I believe it's within that structure
 Contained in this structure that the clinical theories logically nest.
 This can also help you so that'll give you a way of linking
 Connect different theories from a conceptual perspective one theory to another from a conceptual perspective,
 Rather than memorizing theories mechanically without having to rely so much on sheer memorization.
 After that we will discuss the Heroic and Shamanic Initiations, then we'll talk about Heroic and Shamanic Initiations,
 The reason for discussing them and the reason we're going to do that
 Is because people used shamanic initiations
 For tens of thousands of years all over the world,
 It has its own system and they have a particular kind of structure.
 There is an article by Mircea Eliade on the website The paper by Mircea Eliade,
 Which is linked on the site, is very interesting.
 One that details out some of these processes.
 There have been intelligent commentators,
 Like Henri Ellenberger, I think his book "The Discovery of the Unconscious" like Henri Ellenberger, who wrote The Discovery of the Unconscious,
 Very outstanding which I think is an outstanding book,
 He will psychoanalyst who linked the processes
 At the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century that the psychoanalysts uncovered
 The process of discovery in the late part of the 19th century
 Contacted and early part of the 20th century
 Back to these more primordial rituals
 The original ceremony of personality transformation.
 So from a certain perspective So we're going to situate ourselves,
 We will also be immersed in history in some sense, in deep history.
 We will first discuss the underlying mythological landscape, Talking first about the underlying mythological landscape,
 Then talking about archaic modes of personality conceptualization and transformation
 Ancient model of personality conceptualization and transformation,
 Discuss structuralism and then moving from there into Constructivism.
 We will focus on Jean Piaget and we're going to concentrate mostly on Jean Piaget,
 He is a developmental psychologist who was a developmental psychologist.
 Structuralists believe that Constructivists believe you make yourself
 People build themselves out of the information that you gather in the world,
 People are exploring animals so you're an exploring creature.
 You explore specifically when the maps you're using
 Can't guide you well in the world are no longer orienting yourself properly,
 Even when something goes wrong you will really start to explore the world when they're producing errors.
 You go out and gather information,
 Assemble yourself from the information that you discovered.
 The next thing to be discussed is the depth psychologists Jung and Freud, then the depth psychologists Jung and Freud.
 I will use some videos when introducing Jung. I think with Jung, I'm going to walk you through some films.
 I'm not going to use the films, per se.
 But will select some clips I'm going to use clips;
 In chronological order stills some of the film but you know the films.
 Some well-known movie clips will be screened So in chronological order.
 I will explain to you and I'm going to try to explain to you
 How you might use Jungian presuppositions
 To understand what the films are about.
 For example, the movie "The Lion King" If you think about a film, say, The Lion King,
 That movie was very popular which was an extraordinarily popular film,
 But isn't it strange that you go to watch "The Lion King" it's a very strange phenomena that you go and watch it, right?
 Think about it.
 To put it bluntly, it's drawings of animated animals
 But in some sense represent you.
 They're very low-resolution,
 But you perceive them immediately as living things.
 And you attribute to them motivation
 And motive power and understanding.
 You do it automatically without even thinking about it.
 And there's a classic plot behind those stories
 There is a classic plot that lies underneath those stories,
 This plot is very very very old and the plots are very very very very old.
 So old that you must read it. That's why you can understand them.
 The reason you can understand them
 Life has a plot is because life has a plot.
 Or maybe it has a couple of plots,
 A multitude of plots,
 In any case, life has a plot, but life has a plot.
 And if it didn't,
 We wouldn't be able to understand each other.
 So I want to pass some movies So I'd like to illustrate that for you
 Let me explain this to you by analysis of some of these films.
 I think this way is the best way I think it's the best way
 To understand someone as sophisticated as Jung,
 Because Jung is really difficult to interpret who is very difficult to get a handle on.
 I will use the same method for Freud, I'm going to do the same thing,
 When talking about Freud, I will also play a film although I am going to show you a film with Freud.
 This movie is called Crumb. I'm going to show you a film called Crumb,
 Which is a documentary,
 About a troubled family and it's about a very badly enmeshed family,
 All family members and the attempts of the family members to,
 I suppose, escape it.
 I'll talk to you about Freud,
 I will show you the film, I'll show you the film,
 You should be able to experience that should give you a sense
 Freudian psychopathology concept of Freudian psychopathology,
 If he doesn't play the movie, he is afraid it is too difficult to understand which is a very difficult thing otherwise to understand.
 Then there's a midterm exam.
 The midterm is multiple choice.
 You'll do it in class.
 You'll have lots of time to finish it.
 The content of the exam is the chapter we have learned by then. It'll cover the material that we've studied up to that point.
 Then we'll talk about Rogers.
 Carl Rogers is a humanist, Carl Rogers, who's a humanist.
 Rogers has a body-centered philosophy, I suppose.
 He's also interested as well
 In optimal personal development
 And the role that interpersonal communication plays in that.
 Rogers's hypothesis, fundamentally,
 It's actually very interesting and it's a very interesting one,
 He thinks that the sincere communication between two people is that honest communication
 Can make each other's personality transformation between two people can produce personality transformation.
 You might think you kind of know that already,
 When you have a deep, sincere conversation because there's something very engaging about a deep,
 You can say some honest conversation where you're able to say things
 You wouldn't normally say.
 Where you'd be listened to by someone
 Seriously who's actually listening to you,
 Listen to each other and you listen to them,
 Through the conversation you will each other and in the conversation you're moving,
 Something changed both you, forward to a different point.
 That's different than a conversation
 In daily conversation, you feel that you are right and want to convince me where you're right and you're trying to convince me,
 Or I'm right and I'm trying to convince you,
 This is a typical daily conversation which I'd say is the typical conversation.
 The healing conversation is more,
 What's more about paying attention to you? what's up with you?
 Are you okay? How are you doing?
 What happened in your life? How's your life going?
 What sort of problems are you facing?
 What do you think about those problems? What do you think about those problems?
 Do you have any solutions in your mind? Can you conceptualize what a solution might be?
 Is there a way to implement these schemes? Is there a way we might figure out how to get there?
 So it's a problem-solving conversation.
 You first need to assume that it's predicated on the presupposition
 That the person you're conversing with
 Has the capacity to grow in a positive direction
 If they so choose.
 This is That's the fundamental presupposition of Rutgers Psychology
 Basically assume of Rogerian psychology.
 May and Frankl are also humanists.
 I will continue to tell you in the next class I'll finish telling you what the rest of the material
 The content of the second semester is the next time we meet.
 I will talk about it now I should let you know a little more
 About the structure of the course.
 The second midterm is March 14
 There's a final at the end as well.
 The proportion of multiple choice questions is The multiple choice tests are graded in that manner,
 25% 25% and 27.5% 25%, 25%, and 27.5%.
 The content of the exam is not cumulative. They're not cumulative.
 Each test only covers what you covered before
 What you learned after the last exam is the same for the final exam since the last test, including the final.
 Another 15% of the grades are a small essay You'll be required to write an essay of 15%.
 It's 1,000 words, sorry not 750 words.
 And you'll also do an online exercise,
 A personality analysis, which is pass/fail is not counted on a psychological test.
 All you have to is complete it
 And prove that you have completed it and show proof of completion.
 That test is a modified Big Five personality test It helps you do a modified Big Five analysis
 About your own personality,
 Concentrating on your virtues and your faults of it.
 This test is to take the personality theory we have learned It's an active exercise in the application
 Applied to personality theory of personality theory to personal development.
 This is the structure of the course. So that's the structure of the course.
 I can tell you there's a sign-up sheet on the syllabus.
 I have broken the essays down for the entire semester
 There are several categories into multiple types across the entire semester.
 I would highly recommend you go there and sign up,
 There are limited slots for each topic.
 The reason for that is
 I don't want my teaching assistant to breathe at the end of the term I don't want my TA to have to grade 200 essays
 Corrected 200 papers the last week of classes.
 So we have to spread them out across the year.
 So remember to choose a topic you want to do and sign up So figure out a topic and sign up.
 Please do that sooner rather than later.
 This can also help you study diligently. It's an industrious thing to do.
 It'll help you organize yourself.
 I will post some relevant information later. I'll post something that's quite useful
 Teach you how to write, especially a 1,000 word essay about how to write, especially a 1,000 word essay.
 The deadline for essays is the day before the corresponding course. In a close, the essays are due one day before class.
 At the end of the course I'll close, by the way,
 Let me talk about who shouldn't take this course by telling you who shouldn't take this course. Okay?
 First of all, if you didn't like this lecture,
 Then don't take this course,
 Because this is what the lectures
 The same is going to be like.
 They're not for everybody.
 I use a lot of loose associations,
 To elaborate the central idea and try to gather them back in.
 I will walk around and I kind of wander around,
 That way I can talk directly to you,
 Which I like doing,
 Of course I will sacrifice a certain amount of organization for that.
 But my sense is that it's worth the sacrifice.
 The second thing is there's a lot of reading, a lot.
 Many of them are hard science articles. And a lot of it is, I would say, a lot of it's hard science.
 Especially the last half in particular.
 But the first half of a lot of it's
 Discussing philosophical in nature.
 Philosophical/psychological.
 So if you're not interested in that,
 For example, if you're a pure science type
 Or not interested in clinical psychology and you're not interested in the clinical element
 Unwilling to explore of personality, and in investigating
 The philosophical underpinnings behind the clinical theory
 Philosophy of those clinical theories,
 You don't come, then I would say this isn't the course for you.
 So you should take that seriously,
 Because the readings are hard,
 You need a lot of work for this course, there's a lot of work involved in this course
 If you want to choose a course and it would be better if you took a course
 It's better to choose the class that you actually want to take.
 So welcome to Psychology 230,
 We will see you later and we'll see you in a bit.