Imagine that we have a cylinder.
A cylinder is a very simple, three-dimensionalobject but imagine that we have two-dimensional
creatures trying to make sense of a cylinder.
It’s like the flatland conversation.
So two-dimensional creature intersects thecylinder this way and they see a circle.
And in a two-dimensional world a circle isa very clear object, makes perfect sense.
They can describe the mathematics of it.
And they can verify that empirically theyreally did see a circle.
Of course a two-dimensional create that happensto be in another plane could bisect the cylinder
like this and see a rectangle.
And they could be very clear on that alsoand they’re both partially true but they’re
also both totally wrong in that rectangleand circle are both two-dimensional objects
and the thing they’re encountering is athree-dimensional object that actually can’t
be understood in the dimensionality that they’rein.
So then we can see that a debate ensues betweenthe two-dimensional creatures in orthogonal
planes, the circlers and the rectanglers,who are both utterly sure that the thing that
they’re seeing is what they think it isand obviously rectangle and circle are mutually
exclusive descriptions of reality.
One has no corners and straight lines.
One is define exclusively by corners and straightlines.
So it’s easy to see how one can hold a kindof reductive fundamentalist perspective without
even thinking that it is that.
It’s just what I’m observing.
An so then they can debate.
Let’s imagine that one of the two-dimensionalcreatures was able to switch planes and see
the other one and see that there was sometruth in both of them.
Then they could flip flop between perspectivesat different times or they could say we just
need to hold paradox.
It’s both and neither which mostly meansgive up on making sense of reality.
Or they say it’s a middle path that’ssomewhere between the two.
And a middle path in two dimensions is likea rounded rectangle where you kind of do something
that’s a little bit circle-ish and a littlebit rectangle-ish which isn’t even any true
part of what a cylinder is.
And the thing is that they’re just at toolow of a dimensional perspective to properly
understand the nature of cylinder which isactually a very simple thing.
It doesn’t require holding paradox.
It doesn’t require a middle path in thatway.
And it’s because when we think of middlepath oftentimes we’re thinking of extremes
on left or right in a gradient.
But sometimes the two different perspectivesaren’t on a gradient on a single axis.
They’re orthogonal to each other.
And the reason why this is kind of actuallyan interesting example is because perception
itself, a perspective on something definedby perception is inherently a reduction of
information of the thing.
My perspective of it is going to be a lotless total information than the actual thing
is.
So I can look at the object from the eastside or the west side or the top or the north
side or the inside, microscopically, telescopically.
They’ll all give me different information.
None will give me the entirety of the informationabout the situation.
And so there is no all encompassing perspectivethat gives me all of the information about
really almost any situation.
And so what this means is that reality itselfis trans perspectival.
It can’t be captured in any perspective.
So multiple perspectives have to be taken,all of which will have some part of the reality,
some signal.
There may also be distortion.
I may be looking at the thing through a fisheyelens or through a colored lens that creates
some distortion.
But then let’s say I’m looking at a buildingand the picture, the 2D picture from the east
side and from the west side and from insidea particular room and the aerial view are
all obviously very different pictures andit’s because the 3D complex building actually
can’t be seen in a 2D process.
So I could take a lot of pictures and I couldseam them together into a kind of video that
moves through the building.
Now by having a video I added the dimensionof time and I got back to kind of the right
dimensionality to be able to understand thething.
But that’s not a perspective.
That’s a lot of perspectives that we’reable to put together.
So why does this matter.
Well, when we’re looking at political processesand we think about classically political left
kind of perspectives that have more to dowith the orientation of the collective and
the whole and political right that have moreto do with the individual and sovereignty.
On the right do we want people who are moreself-responsible and who are more sovereign
and who are more empowered.
And do we want to give more power to peoplewho are doing a better job.
All of that makes perfect sense.
Left perspective.
Do we want to create situations that actuallyinfluence the individuals in the situation
to do better – social systems, education,healthcare.
Does the environment affect the individual.
You can really think of it as does the environmentaffect the individual while understanding
evolutionary theory that individuals are reallyformed by their environment, of course.
With humans that are niche creators do theindividuals effect their environment.
Of course.
If you hold either of those as the only perspectiveobviously you’re just missing so much which
is that the individual is affecting the whole.
The whole is, in turn affecting the individualsand how do we create systems that have virtuous
cycles between empowering individuals andcreating better social systems that have the
effect of creating humans that are not dependenton the social systems but that are more sovereign
and can, in turn, create better social systems.
And whether we’re thinking about a politicalissue like that or we’re looking at a psychologic
issue like the orientation of being and enjoyingreality as is and accepting ourselves and
others as is and doing and becoming whichis adding to life, adding to ourselves, seeking
to improve ourselves.
How do we hold these together.
They don’t just have to be held as paradoxor holding one or flip flopping.
There’s a way that when understanding howthey relate to each other – so in that example
if I understand the nature of a person asa noun that is static then it seems like accepting
them the way they are unconditionally, removesthe basis for growth.
But if I understand that the person is a dynamicprocess, that they’re actually a verb that
intrinsic to what they are in the moment isdesire and impulse to grow and become.
And like that loving someone unconditionallyinvolves wanting for them their own self-actualization
and there’s no dichotomy between acceptingsomeone ourselves as is or the world and seeking
to help it grow, advance, express.
So it’s a very simple process of sayingthe ability to take multiple perspectives,
to see the partial truth in them and thento be able to seam them together into something
that isn’t a perspective.
It’s a trans perspective capacity to holdthe relationships between many perspectives
in a way that can inform our choice-makingis fundamental to navigating reality.