Okay, we're going to take a step back, historically
 Last time we talked about Carl Rogers as a phenomenologist
 We started our brief exploration of the ideas behind the phenomenology, but now we're going back in time
 to talk about the end of the nineteenth century,
 and we'll deal with Nietzsche, Dostoevsky and Kierkegaard a little more closely,
 and the reason is because those three men
 (in my opinion more than anyone else in the nineteenth century) laid the foundation, not just for psychoanalysis
 and then personality psychology and clinical psychology, but described them
 also the broader social, political and cultural situation in which modern man finds itself today,
 and their ideas are extraordinarily refined and well worth understanding,
 because if you are able ... we'll cover these personality theories one by one,
 and we explore biology and neuropsychology, you need an underlying structure.

 You need an understanding of an underlying structure to give everything a place,
 in order to be able to understand it better that way ... ideas develop historically,
 an idea is like a seed,
 From a seed other plants grow, and the plant grows and gets branches.
 If you go back to the starting point, you can often better understand the entire structure,
 and these three men, they are so brilliant it is a pleasure to learn their way of thinking,
 although it is very debilitating, really.
 We start with this diagram that you can remember.
 Think about it from Piaget's perspective, as we explained that the child “puts themselves together”
 by practicing micro-routines (motor micro-routines) that are accompanied by perception frames,
 and also be integrated into a motivation system because they are motivated actions,
 and the child practices that
 align micro-personalities,
 to create increasingly complex and increasingly integrated macro personalities.
 That's what this diagram shows
 We look at it from an adult's point of view,
 so if you want to be a good person, you can divide “being a good person” into parts,
 being a good person is an abstract ideal, but as you move closer to the point where goodness is manifested in action,
 you get closer to concrete actions in the world.

 So the abstract category of “good person” actually consists of ...
 you can see it as a complex melody of motor actions and perceptions,
 and perception is closely related to motor action because when you perceive something,
 you do that in part by actively exploring the world.
 Partly that's why your eyes are always moving,
 and that your head moves when you listen, and if you want to touch something you must actively examine it,
 so it is always an activity of exploration.
 When you think about how the child “assembles” itself step by step
 can you see that as a biological process unfolding,
 the child who crawls first and then learns to walk can be seen as a biological development,
 but that is an unjustified simplification,
 because people live in a very social world from day one.
 What that means is the way behavioral patterns or micro-personalities
 begin to organize, always takes place under the influence of the society of which they are a part.
 Piaget stated that the child has basic built-in reflexes at birth,
 and that those reflexes are extended to increasingly complex structures,
 but you can see that even the extension of those basic reflexes ...
 even in the beginning, there is a search and suck reflex that you can elicit from a child
 tapping the side of his cheek if it's newborn,
 and it will try to put whatever ticks in its mouth, that's part of the reflexes,
 the built-in perceptual and motor unit that enables the child to start sucking.
 But the bottom line is that what it sucks in is not a static and objective entity.
 It's a person, and part of breastfeeding is establishing a relationship,
 a complex relationship because it is not just a nutritional relationship.
 It is a relationship with concern.
 It is a relationship based on physical interaction.
 It can be accompanied by nerves, and this often happens, especially with a new mother.
 It is a very complicated, dynamic, social act,
 and that means right in the beginning, the baby's knee-jerk movements
 must be modified by social necessity in order for that process to run smoothly.
 For example, if a baby is breastfed, it should not bite,
 he has no teeth yet, so being bitten “in itself” is not a catastrophe, but it is not pleasant.
 So what happens when the baby bites the mother is the mother pulls back and scares the baby,
 the baby will cry, and the mother will be shocked by the mistake. The baby must learn ...
 in a sense he must immediately behave civilized.
 When Freud talked about the process of socialization, he tended to focus more on toilet training,

 because he thought that was the first place where ...
 the first important place where the “id”
 of the child (what Rogers would see as the organism's domain of experience)
 is brought under the control of the superego,
 because for the baby it is of course its fundamental biological function to relieve itself,
 but that is put under very strict social control,
 and that is a complicated form of learning.
 In essence, it is the acquisition of voluntary mastery over what before one
 involuntary reflex, and that can go well, or bad, or very bad.
 I knew a family with a daughter who, when she was three,
 only let her stool flow when she was wearing a diaper.
 That meant she had complete control over her bowel movements,
 but that she refused to participate in the social ritual of proper toileting.
 It was a war, really a war, and such things don't rarely happen,
 and you remember the movie Crumb, the mother ... the boy accuses the mother of giving them enemas,
 and of course she denies that such a thing would have happened
 where they both roll their eyes, and they all laugh,
 but it's not really amusing.
 Anyway, my point is that even at the micro level, the manifestation
 of micro-personalities expands and organizes in an environment conditioned by social expectation.

 Okay, then ... this is something we haven't discussed yet.
 You may wonder where social expectation comes from.
 That's a complicated question because in a way it's the same question
 is like where culture comes from, and that's partly a complex question
 because you have to include the evolutionary history that the basic material for
 the development of culture, thus human biology.
 You have to take that into account,
 and then you have to consider human history,
 and what you do not have to take into account is not clear, because it is very difficult to determine the origin
 discovering the social routines that determine the fundamental social contract.
 We know how to behave appropriately, in general.
 We have a set of expectations and a set of desires about how other people will behave towards us
 and they have the same thing, and everyone is in, and everyone knows,
 unless they are badly socialized and that
 can usually see you immediately.
 Kids see that because when a three-year-old plays with another three-year-old,
 and one of them is poorly socialized causing the behavior
 of a ill-mannered two-year-old, the other three-year-old will,
 the socially developed, do not play with the former.
 Although they would be fine with playing with a real two-year-old for a while.

 It takes little time.
 Children are already developed at the age of three
 enough to embody the rules that dictate culturally appropriate behavior,
 and those rules… they are patterns, they are not rules for the child, because the child is not
 able to articulate it explicitly, but it can act intuitively.
 Piaget talked about this because he said it the way
 the slightly larger micro personalities, such as a two-year-old,
 be integrated into the wider social world through games
 takes place, with peers and older children, and games are a way to ...
 a game is essentially an agreed… it is an agreed domain of action and perception
 with a specific goal, and the goal is defined by the players, and the domain becomes
 defined by the players, so if you are a good player,
 you become part of a higher structure, and that higher structure is the game.
 When you play football, you will suddenly (if you are civilized) all forms of behavior
 manifest that are appropriate in playing football, and you create your
 individuality voluntarily subordinate to the higher structure of the game, that one
 joint agreement, it is a basic social contract.
 You practice being part of a basic social contract by playing games,
 and that can be done with games that are relatively simple and regulated by
 certain conventions and explicit rules, such as football, or that can be on a lake
 complex, and less structured and explicit way, through
 "Pretend" play.
 What kids normally do, when they do, is gather in one
 small group, and discuss what the play will be like, for example:
 “We're going to imitate x. We are going to imitate a family. ”
 Then everyone gets a role, and you have to act your role, but exactly how to do it
 acting is left open during the game so you can improvise, and what?
 children do when they do is act like family because they have to
 feeling the family, being a parent is not a collection of ideas about parenting,
 it is a collection of behavioral patterns.
 It is a dance that teaches you to dance with your children and your partner,
 it's very complicated, and the rules go way beyond what you can put into words,
 because you can ask yourself a question like, "How should you discipline a child?"
 First, you can argue about that endlessly, but second, you can't
 formulate a set of principles to determine your behavior for all situations in which
 a child is likely to disrupt the social environment.
 You have to be smarter than your expression to be good at something so complex
 like disciplining a child, for to discipline also means to encourage, one
 Part of disciplining is, “Don't do those things,” but another part of it
 disciplining is: “You have to do those things,” it is learning
 a moral code, and much of it is done on the basis of non-verbal behavior,
 set an example for spontaneous imitation, and all kinds of things that are not verbal.
 Piaget talked about the game, and games are getting more and more complex
 more abstract, and more and more like real life as you get older,
 until they turn into what sociologists call "roles."
 So the role you're playing right now is, basically, student, it's a game,
 and it is a game because it is in a sense fictional.
 It's dramatic fiction in a way.
 The only reason it exists as a role is because society is structured in such a way that ...
 it allows you to do what you do and live at the same time.
 It is not actually an adaptation to the natural world, but it
 is real life, you don't get closer than that to real life, because almost
 everything that modern humans do, and perhaps for a long time,
 has this game structure.
 The games are getting more ... more and more inclusive in a sense,
 but you can almost say you never get to the point where
 you are no longer playing a game.
 Putting it that way is a bit too simple, because there are games and "meta-games", but
 we are not going to talk about meta-games now.
 You are now able to understand simple games, and you can also do some
 understand the role patterns of a higher level, for example you can explain what the
 means to be a student.
 But if you go up the hierarchy… a good person, part of it
 good person can be good student.
 You can roughly indicate what it means to be a good student,
 although not complete, but if you go to levels above such as “good citizen”
 or “good person” it becomes more and more difficult to make explicit, because it becomes more and more abstract,
 and more and more things, so by the time you get to the top of the
 hierarchy, so to speak, "Be a good person" ...
 That is a phenomenon that is bigger than you can express.
 It cannot be fully articulated.
 Now I want to read you something from Nietzsche.
 You have to listen carefully, because the way Nietzsche
 writing has some interesting aspects.
 He writes aphoristically, and an aphorism is a short statement, often just a sentence
 usually a paragraph, which contains a lot of ideas, and I think you can say
 that if you read Nietzsche
 (and I'm now going to read "Beyond Good and Evil") every sentence
 contains an idea, and often an original idea, and that is a remarkable achievement.
 I have often gone through books and marked them (then I make a fold in the
 page) where I found a valuable idea.
 An idea that I have not seen before, an original idea.
 And in the average book I read, I don't find any.
 Maybe one or two, but Nietzsche's probably twenty each
 page, which means… it brings together a tremendous amount of information in a very
 small space, he tried to do it, and he had reasons for it.
 One was that his health was not good, although he was a genius from a young age.
 He was a professor in Germany when he was, I think, twenty-two or twenty-three years old,
 which is impossible, because you will not become a professor, certainly one hundred and thirty or one hundred and forty years ago
 a German university at the age of twenty-three is simply impossible.
 He was a genius, but his health failed him, causing writing
 was difficult for him, so what he did was think very long and write very short,
 that meant he had a huge amount of thoughts (a genius amount)
 compressed into a single sentence, or paragraph,
 and he said he liked to philosophize with a hammer ... that hierarchy I just left
 See, we've talked about the idea that if something disrupts your life,
 the size of your comment matches
 the level at which it occurs.
 It does you more harm if you are accused of being a bad person
 than when someone complains about you, your fork on the other side
 off the plate.
 I think you can say that those certain value hierarchies ...
 they are a kind of cards, as it were.
 They are small units of manners through which you know how to maneuver in the world,
 and as you move up the hierarchy the map gets bigger and bigger,
 and if you destroy someone's card from whatever fork to put on the table, it's not that bad.
 You can easily correct that.
 That leaves 99.99 percent of the personality intact.
 But if you fail a crucial test, for example,
 while you study because you want to study medicine,
 that will destroy about fifty to sixty percent of your personality,
 or at least it will feel that way, and that's because the structure you're using to create the
 relationship between yourself and the world to regulate at a high level is damaged, and
 that makes it no longer valid… if you are not a student. If you are no longer a good student,
 then all parts that made you a good student can no longer be valid,
 and you may have put a lot of effort into being a good student, so when all of a sudden you aren't,
 you have to ask yourself: "What am I actually, and where are the mistakes?"
 That's an extremely difficult cognitive problem because who knows how long you will
 it took to build that structure.
 Maybe fifteen years, and you've practiced a lot on it, and it's a big one
 part of your identity, because someone may ask you, "What are you?" And you say, “I am
 a student." They may say, “What are you doing?” But they can also be easy
 say "What are you?" "I am a student."
 Now, if you're not a student (at least, if you define it that way), what are you really?



 Well, Nietzsche put a lot of information in a sentence or paragraph, and you have to be whole
 be careful when you read it.
 Jung is like that, he gives you some information, packaged in a paragraph, kind of
 information that disrupts tall structures.
 You won't even notice, it's so undermining, and that was exactly
 intention.
 That's what he aimed for.
 He had his reasons for that.
 He would say you have to be broken down to the foundation before you can rebuild.
 It's like a journey to the underworld.
 And I think that's philosophy.
 You cannot learn a new principle without making old principles disappear, because you
 cannot have both the old and the new at the same time.
 Radical insights almost always require the destruction of old habits and
 actions and perceptions, and that's a kind of death, an abstract death like it
 true, but that does not mean that it is not painful, and as the abstract death intense
 enough, it can drive people to suicide because it makes them seem easier
 kill himself than repair himself, confront the tension,
 and going through the suffering and the excruciatingly difficult process of rebuilding.
 It is quite possible that they experience this as more emotionally threatening than death ...
 that is not very rare.
 It is certainly a behavior that everyone ... I suspect ...
 everyone here has known someone who is related in some way
 had with suicide. Maybe no family members,
 or even relatives, but the chances of you being someone
 knows who knows a case of suicide is very great.

 So Nietzsche is a very dangerous thinker.
 The only person I know who comes close to him in that regard is Jung, and
 Jung is actually less problematic, because much of what Dostoevsky does is destruction.
 It's intelligent, brilliant destruction, but it doesn't really solve it.
 He outlines, as it were, the possibility of a solution, and died young, and what happened
 What happened was that Jung continued where Nietzsche had left off, and he did
 tried to solve the problems that Nietzsche had left behind.
 It was Nietzsche, in a sense along with Dostoevsky, who made the final death
 God preached at the end of the nineteenth century, leaving people without it
 faith, and we'll discuss why that was so important.

 What Jung did, he was trying to save the father from the underworld, in a sense.

 He tried… he tried to go back to the religious traditions that Nietzsche
 saw as irretrievably anachronistic and scrapped by the claims of science.
 He tried to go back to those religious traditions and rethink them
 from a psychological perspective to the necessary meaning contained therein
 decided to reclaim so that people could return to their culture and, in principle,
 would not be as prone to pathological belief systems such as ideologies appearing to fill in the gaps.
 Nietzsche stated very clearly, and Dostoevsky was also aware of it
 late nineteenth century, that the death of God would cause people
 would turn en masse to rationalist ideologies and that would claim many lives.
 They saw it coming, and that's a wonderful prediction.
 It is truly wonderful.
 It shows how deeply they understood the structure.
 Okay, I'm going to read something from Nietzsche, and then we'll go back to the hierarchy
 so that you can understand more of the structure of the hierarchy.

 He's talking about philosophical ideas here, and in fact he's talking about
 formulated ethics.
 You might think that philosophers come up with moral principles,
 and that is how one often thinks about, in particular, philosophical ethics.
 As if it were the philosophers who come up with the ideas, but that's not what Nietzsche
 believed.
 Instead, he thought the following:
 “Different philosophical ideas are not developed freely or independently.
 They grow in connection with each other, even if they seem sudden and random
 appear in the history of thought, they are part of a system
 like all members of the fauna of a continent. ”
 It's an interesting idea.
 The first idea he brings up is that you… the best way to get over
 to think of a philosophical system, such as a philosophical ethic, is as if the
 different claims are like animals related to each other within an ecosystem.
 He uses a biological metaphor for the emergence of a philosophical system.
 It's an interesting way of thinking, and it makes sense because
 as a philosophical system of ethics (a philosophical system that tells you how to behave and why)
 is about how you should behave and you're a biological being
 then it makes sense that the concepts that direct actions can be seen
 as biological entities.
 They are abstract biological entities, but they have the same nature
 as biological entities, which, according to Nietzsche, means that they function within the same rules.
 In places like this he is ahead of Freud.
 Nietzsche says, “They are part of a system like all members of the fauna
 of a continent.
 This eventually becomes visible through the following: continuously fill the most
 various philosophers always put in a basic scheme of possible philosophies.
 Through an invisible spell they end up in the same orbit again and again, how
 independent they also feel with their critical or systematic will.
 They are guided by something within.
 Something drives them to a certain order, one after the other, namely the inner methodology
 and proportion of their ideas.
 Their thinking is not so much a discovery as a recognition,
 a remembering, a return, and a coming home to a distant, old communal house
 of the soul from which these ideas sprang.
 Philosophizing in that respect is actually a kind of atavism of the highest level. ”
 Okay, this is the idea.
 It contains two basic ideas that distinguish Nietzsche.
 Okay, I'm going to read another piece, which explains the first.
 “It has gradually become clear to me what every great philosophy up to now consisted of,
 namely, a confession of its creator, and a taste of an involuntary and
 unconscious autobiography, and in addition that morality (or non-morality) in every philosophy is the
 true core, from which the whole plant sprouts. ”
 That is a very radical claim, because what Nietzsche says is that philosophies,
 even if they see themselves as rational, are deeply personal, and they are also necessary
 part of a motivational structure that is either life-affirming or life-denying, something in that trend.

 There is no philosophizing without values.
 It is the expression of biological and culturally conditioned existence,
 conditioned by (say) the kind of fundamental forces that Freud has
 described in the biological domain, and conditioned by the cultural processes
 which we described when we just talked about Piaget, and what the philosopher does is
 observing all those things that are going on, putting words to it, and that
 confuse with his own thoughts.
 It's a brilliant idea.
 You can see it like this.
 One of the things Piaget said was when kids start playing games
 (if they are little), games together… you can watch the children together
 play games, maybe eight children are playing marbles for example,
 then you take the children out of the game and ask what the rules are, and what is there
 then it happens that you have a collection of different (different and conflicting)
 explicit rules, and what that means is that the children can play the game
 when they are playing the game, and in the context of all other people,
 because in a sense the game is partially present in all of them, and as long as they are there
 all are, it works, but when you take a kid out, it doesn't have the intellectual
 ability to describe the behavioral patterns that make up the game, that is
 say they know things they can't put into words because you may think
 that the rules of the game come first, and then the game arises, but that is incorrect.
 The game is created first, and only then do the rules appear, and of course
 There is a reciprocal relationship between the two because once the rules once
 formulated somewhat, the game gets more structure, and then the
 rules get more structure, and so on.
 So the wording changes the rules.
 What Nietzsche says is that the same is true of societies.
 He says that insofar as you can see society as a collective game
 played by millions of people over long periods of time ... it is one
 game of a higher order, and it came about "bottom up."
 It arose from biological impulses and interpersonal and social interactions,
 who conditioned and shaped everyone's behavior and perception.
 And that happened long before anyone could articulate what those rules were.
 Remember that when Nietzsche wrote, people did not really know how old the earth was,
 or how old the universe was.
 People, even the radical people, thought in terms of hundreds of thousands
 years, while we now know that the universe is fourteen billion years old, and that the
 Earth is four billion years old, and there has been much life since
 three point five billion years.
 So the historical context in which we arose has expanded enormously since the
 nineteenth century, and what that means is the way our games
 structure goes back a very long way in time.
 I thought I already told you about the lobster social hierarchy, right? Even lobsters ...
 that is four hundred million years ago.
 Cancerians organize in a social space, and they regulate each other, and that
 basically means that lobsters have a lobster society, and every lobster has
 biological dispositions that are strongly determined.
 They are very ... the lobster is a very determined creature, but the way
 that biological dispositions manifest is conditioned and shaped by the
 social environment. Cancers started playing games 400 million years ago
 games, and we've been on a very long evolutionary journey since then, and
 have been playing social games all this time, and that means that the way
 we interact with each other has evolved, and it has even shaped how our biology
 manifests itself, because culture is so old, and then we were able to abstract better and better ...
 that arose probably seven million years ago, modern man arose
 about a hundred and fifty thousand years ago, we separated about seven
 million years ago from the common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees.
 We can deduce this from the analysis of genetic differences.
 The brain got bigger quickly after that point, and our culture got bigger and bigger
 conscious, formulated, complex, larger and increasingly technological.
 As a result, it became more defined by social norms than in a number of ways
 by deterministic, biological dispositions, but that will be the case for a long time
 been. We have solid evidence for that… we started about two
 million years ago, and (I apologize if I told you this) as
 you look at a human, and at a chimpanzee, there are some things out there
 morphologically very different.
 The chimpanzee is much smaller, much wider, and much stronger.
 An average chimpanzee male has about six times the strength of the strongest Olympic athlete.
 So don't mess with chimpanzees.
 They tear you apart.
 They are very strong and dangerous.
 But the chimpanzee has something like that.
 They have a huge digestive system, because they mainly eat leaves,
 and leaves have few nutrients, making them large amounts
 leaves need to eat, and leaves are difficult to digest, so they
 have to chew very much.
 The average chimpanzee is chewing eight hours a day, and they have that
 very long digestive system because it takes a long time to supply nutrients
 extract leaves.
 We solved that when we invented fire, fire makes ours possible
 digestion to “outsource,” because if you cook most things, vegetables, but especially meat ...
 When you cook it, it becomes much more “bio-available,” and takes a lot less energy to digest.
 That way your stomach can get smaller, and your brain bigger, and apparently what is what we did,
 because here we are, relatively slim, at least compared to chimpanzees.
 The use of fire originated two million years ago.
 It's a real cultural revolution, but that cultural revolution is so old that it is us
 body has completely changed, so this dynamic between biology and culture is already
 has been going on for a long time, and it defines everything we do.

 Well, now a complex idea.
 Think of a pack of wolves.
 A wolf pack is a fairly complicated social group.
 It looks a lot like a primitive human group, which is why we are already alive
 twenty-five thousand years along with dogs.
 Maybe it was wolves who first followed us to look for leftover food,
 or (which I think is more likely) someone went hunting (a primitive hunter),
 killed a wolf woman, found the puppies, and brought one for the children to play.
 Thus the dog was born. I think it must have been something like this
 because dogs are, in fact, genetically identical to wolves.

 We get along with dogs, and the reason for that is dogs
 have a social organization.
 You can call it a social hierarchy, which is quite similar to the human social organization,
 and you can see that what it, in part, means to be human is the same as what it means
 means to be a group animal like a dog, or a group animal like ours
 domestic animals, horses or cows, for example, which we can tame because they are social.
 Part of the structure of our social organization is the same as that of one
 animal social hierarchy, such as the chimpanzee social hierarchy, for example.
 We know that chimpanzees and other primates, monkeys for example, are very aware
 are of the hierarchical levels in their social structure, and there are ...
 I think Vervet monkeys ...
 This is a funny experiment.
 Imagine that the top Vervet monkeys are some kind of famous monkeys, and the monkeys
 at the bottom are the mob, you take pictures of people from the street, at the bottom
 hierarchy, and you take pictures of celebrities, and you show those pictures to a
 human audience, then people will look at the celebrities longer.

 If you take pictures of the Vervet monkeys at the top and Vervet monkeys at the bottom, and
 if you show those photos to Vervet monkeys, they will look longer at the photos of
 the Vervet monkeys at the top than those at the bottom of the ladder.

 In a sense they are captivated by the individuals who are higher in the social order
 stand, and that makes sense, because what you should feel, certainly in a fairly aggressive one
 social hierarchy, what you should feel as you rise to the top of the social
 approaching hierarchy, what you should feel for whatever is at the top,
 should be more and more awe.
 When people feel awe, they get shivers.
 The reason it happens is because it's an atavism.
 It is a remnant of the time when we were threatened by something awe-inspiring like
 a snake or a bear or something like that.
 Your hair, your fur, would be straight up so you would look taller
 and you can still see that in cats.
 Two cats normally look at each other this way.
 But when they fight they turn so you can see them from the side
 making them appear bigger, and making their fur and tail bigger around the other cat
 show that they are actually much bigger than that other cat imagined.
 They both do that so that makes it a little pointless,
 but they're just cats so don't make it so hard for them
 but the point is they put on their fur, and the same thing happens, for example
 you listen to very good music that touches you deeply and you get the shivers.
 The hairs on your neck will stand up, which is a sign of awe.
 The reason why you should feel in awe of something higher in the
 social hierarchy is because that "thing" has power, there are several reasons.
 First, that thing has power.
 You better be careful because it can put you in your place, and quickly.
 And in part there is a social hierarchy, so that everyone knows their place and there
 does not need to be reminded by on a regular basis
 to be half finished.
 You may be number nine, and the top is number one, you may be number nine.
 That's not so good, but number nine without pain,
 is much better than number nine and lying on the floor bleeding, what happens to
 social hierarchies is that they usually organize, in part on the basis of
 power, but not just based on power. Everyone knows their place, and about
 everyone stays there, and remains so for several generations, in complex hierarchical primate groups.
 Status is hereditary.
 There is no big difference between that and hereditary monarchies in humans.

 It's a reflection of ... it's much more complex in humans because it's more
 explicit and structured, but it is basically the same.
 Nietzsche's point was… imagine…
 This is another problem.
 Imagine…
 There's a social hierarchy, and it's pretty stable, and one of the things you want
 doing is getting to the top of the social hierarchy, and the reason is that… there are all kinds
 reasons, good quality partners, that is the primary reason.
 That is especially the case with people if you are a man, because men are
 very different in reproduction, compared to women, that means
 many males do not reproduce at all and a few quite a lot, while the average woman reproduces at least a little.
 That means the competition between men is fiercer, and that's part of the reason
 why social hierarchies tend to focus on male power,
 because competition is more important to them.
 The outcome is more crucial.
 What happens when people compete within the social hierarchy, what they do is
 trying to discover who is best suited for the top position.
 You may think it's a matter of power and average politics
 leftist person, social constructivists, make you believe that's the only aspect,
 that the whole social hierarchy is nothing but a power system, and the people
 at the top there because they have power, there is power, and by that mean
 they have the ability to impose their will on others.
 That is a silly theory, because it is one-dimensional.
 We know that people are multi-dimensional.
 There is not one motivation that rules.
 For Freud, it was sex and aggression, and if you want potential candidates
 there are two, but there are many others.
 People are playful, and play is a primary biological network.
 We suffer.
 We are hungry.
 We are thirsty.
 We make friends.
 There is a lot of biological necessity that drives the shape of our personality, there are
 biological sub-personalities, and to randomly designate one of them as
 the foundation of something as complex as social organization is… is a false form of it
 monotheism. It's an absurd idea, and it's kind of an idea that only humans
 who don't like to think, because once you have that idea, all that
 power, you don't have to think anymore.
 Someone may ask you: “Why is complex phenomenon X structured in a certain way?
 Why does the economy have a certain structure? ”
 "So that the people at the top can keep their power."
 Yeah, well, but that's maybe only ten percent of the reason.
 It is nowhere near 100 percent.
 There are many reasons why hierarchies have the structure they have, and
 raw physical force is one of them, but it is not stable.
 Frans de Waal who observed how chimpanzees change their social hierarchy
 organized in the zoo in Arnhem in the Netherlands, saw that it was quite typical,
 or at least possibly that the meanest, ugliest, strongest chimpanzee male was the dominant one.
 Sometimes it was the chimpanzee who learned to pick up a trash can and take one
 stick to intimidate his enemies.
 Some creativity is possible, but what De Waal discovered was that the stable
 hierarchies were never led by barbarian chimpanzee dictators because of those
 were eliminated by coalitions of other males, because if you get one
 anti-social, aggressive and hard guy, okay, you're tough, but three less,
 more friendly males who have a bond of friendship, those with chimpanzees
 can be very intense ...
 As soon as that little guy turns around, or has a bad day, or gets hurt,
 the others jump in and tear him up, and that's exactly what happened.
 De Waal discovered that the more stable social chimpanzee usually has hierarchies
 were led by males who were kind and comrades who were their
 respected social obligations towards their friends, and those well
 were for the females in the group and the children, even if they were not his,
 and the idea is that power is an unstable basis for the maintenance of one
 long-term social hierarchy, because even with chimpanzees it is in a sense
 that you need the consent of those who are governed or else you will have a revolution.
 You will have a revolution if you put people or animals in a situation where they
 have nothing to lose, and what that means is that there are limitations with
 with regard to how you can behave while trying to advance in the
 social hierarchy, because if you are too aggressive, and no one else flatters, and you don't
 communicates with the others in the group, they will turn against you and you
 finish, so if you want to move up in group, you have to do it in a way that
 civilized enough so that you don't get everyone against you. It means that
 maneuver to move up a power hierarchy, one in particular
 complex power hierarchy, demands much more from you than just strength.
 Well we got this idea now
 that there are principles that determine how someone moves up in a social hierarchy,
 even in animals, and one of the hallmarks is… one of the
 characteristics that necessarily limit that process is that over a longer period of time, the group
 cannot allow anyone to rise higher
 the social hierarchy destabilizes, because then it is over.
 "Game over."
 So at least you have to learn how to get higher without breaking the hierarchy
 destabilize, because otherwise there is nothing left when you are on top.
 Animals know that.
 They know that instinctively.
 For example, when wolves fight, they grow up and growl at each other, they
 thrust their shoulders forward, they become more and more aggressive until an attack
 seems inevitable, and often one withdraws.
 They don't fight.
 No one gets hurt, and that's the usual situation.
 It's as if one of them says, "Okay, I'll get out of here."
 And who knows why.
 I suspect that the wolf with a higher serotonin level wins, because less
 has negative emotions, the serotonin level rises when you are higher in the social hierarchy.
 Occasionally they will actually fight, but the fight usually doesn't last long,
 then the loser lies on his back, shows his throat to the winner, what a
 very special behavior is since wolves have throats of their prey
 tear open, and the higher wolf will go away, think about that.
 That is an incredibly refined moral.
 It is reminiscent of the New Testament commandment to love your enemy
 because that's exactly what the wolf does, he doesn't know about it because he can rule it
 not formulate, but he acts as if even the one who
 attacked you is valuable if he belongs to your group.
 You can thus see the ancient biological origin of the idea that all individuals
 are equal and have value.
 These things have very deep roots.
 They are not random.
 They are not random, and no one invented them
 and that's exactly what Nietzsche says here:
 “To understand how a philosopher's most complex metaphysical propositions came about, it is always good and wise to ask yourself first:
 "What morals do they have, or does he have in mind?"
 Accordingly, I don't believe an instinct for the truth is the
 father of philosophy, but that another instinct, here too, has only use
 made of knowledge (and erroneous knowledge) as an instrument.
 But who examines the instincts of man to see to what extent they behave
 Posed as inspiring spirits (or as demons), will discover them
 all have once philosophized, and that each of them is only too happy to be themselves
 as the ultimate purpose of existence,
 and as the true ruler of the other instincts. ”
 What is he saying?
 Nietzsche makes it clear in passages related to this one.
 He saw man as a collection of subsouls, and the subsouls were
 anchored in biological soil, and that is the case with all people, which means
 we are more or less comparable.
 It certainly made our groups comparable, and each one of these biological
 subsystems, conceptualized as a subsoul, was something of its own
 perspective, own rules, own games, competing for leadership.
 You know that because sometimes you're reading, and you're trying to focus on
 a higher goal, such as closing a course properly, and suddenly a
 biologically determined subsystem and says, “This would be a good time for
 a cup of coffee."
 And you might be doing everything you can to stop that system from doing it
 takes over, but often it does, and often regardless of what you think you actually do
 want to do, and then you are upset because you have postponed things again ...
 Nietzsche saw the psyche as a place… you could see yourself as one
 collection of abstract… it's like your brain is a collection of animals, and the
 animals are all dependent on each other, but every animal has to master every now and then
 and every animal wants to be in control more often than it should be and the higher cortex
 systems exist to figure out how all those animals can coordinate with each other
 so that they all get what they need, without interfering with each other, for long periods of time,
 in the presence of other people, in a way that works.
 It's very complex.
 Okay, let's go back to the hierarchy.
 There is the hierarchy, and over time ... remember that this hierarchy is a very
 long period remains, and do not forget that the people who are the top of the hierarchy
 are more likely to leave children than those who do not
 achieve, and what that means is that the hierarchy as one of the primary
 selection processes work in humanity, which causes us to evolve into
 that which can most successfully climb the social hierarchy, and that
 means that we evolve towards what has the greatest chance of being good
 government, and that is not only cultural. It's cultural because it is, it's constant
 interplay between culture and biology, which is about four hundred million years, or more, old.
 But it's more complicated than that, it's one of the things you have to do
 understand if you really want to understand what Nietzsche meant by the death of
 God, because that is his most famous statement ...
 “God is dead, and we've killed him, and we'll never have enough water
 have to flush out the blood. ”
 He didn't say that triumphantly.
 He said it in horror.
 Well, imagine.
 Human society is becoming more and more complex, our brains are becoming more and more
 bigger to keep up with social organizations, and we always can
 organize more complex communities, and what happened was that tribes
 hitherto isolated, come together, and have to enter into conflicts and negotiations,
 and what partly conflicts about is the way you should act, and what the values ​​should be.
 There is an old mythological idea that the gods in heaven fight to see who the
 dominant god.
 You can imagine that all those separate tribes had their own ideals, that
 were beings of their own imaginations, but they were imaginary representations
 of appropriate behavioral patterns, and they saw them as transcendent and transcendent. If strain A
 came into contact with tribe B, the gods would collide, and after all
 killing and destruction would accompany the two tribes
 going together would take maybe hundreds of years, and the religious system that
 "Above that," and the representation of the social hierarchy would also change.
 So you take tribe A, then tribe B, then tribe C, and then tribe D, and over time
 collect, separate, articulate and represent all their beliefs, and whatever
 happens is that this tribe has a game, and this tribe has a game, and this tribe has a game,
 and if you put all those games together
 they drift, creating a meta game.
 With luck, the best of all three games will end up in a larger game, and
 it has to be the best, otherwise it won't work.
 Then it would fall apart 'cause if your family unit don't work it will fall apart
 and it may kill people.
 It must… it must be repeatable.
 It must be playable over a longer period of time, without breaking apart due to internal pressure
 fall, and without being destroyed by external forces.
 Precise restrictions apply.
 Let's say this happens over tens of thousands of years.
 It happened in the Middle East, we know that.
 For example, when Mesapotamia came together, it was a collection of
 different tribes, and all the gods of those tribes, and we know that the
 mesapotamians gathered all those gods into one god called Marduk, and that
 the story they tell about the merging of the gods into one god, the
 story is of the gods who come together and vote on which of them is at the top
 should stand. And we know that the Emperor of Mesapotamia the
 had a responsibility to embody that supreme deity, and that he would be a good emperor as a result, and there he became every year
 with the New Years ceremony recalled. He had to confess in which ways he was not a good Marduk
 and he was punished for that, then they reenacted the battle of the gods, and recreated the character of Marduk.
 Good, so you can understand how that could come about. You can say it
 idea of ​​the resulting ideal was not rational.
 It was the result of conflict and real-world cooperation over a period of time.
 The representations of them were… we can see them as narrative representations
 or, if deep enough, even mythology.
 We can consider them as the basis of religious assumptions
 emerging, so what happens is that which is at the top of the social hierarchy
 as the representation of the good person, ultimately does not differ from the idea of ​​the sovereign god,
 that arose over thousands and thousands of years of human history.
 The whole structure has something at the top, and in the imagination that is understood as
 divine.
 It is the result of the struggle between representations of the imagination throughout
 thousands of years, and that's a reflection of the actual conflicts and the
 reshaping societies at the time.
 There's something at the top.
 We can say that in the West, in Western Europe, Christ is the one who is on top,
 the dying, and reviving hero.
 We have discussed reasons for this.
 It is that which can go to the underworld and come back.
 Well, that's at the top.

 What happens when that disappears?
 For that we go to Dostoevsky.
 This is from "Notes from the Underground." This is someone who lives underground because that's where you go when
 your value systems collapse.
 “I am a sick man ...
 i am a bitter man.
 I am an unattractive man.
 I think my liver is sick.
 But I don't know about my illness, and I'm not sure what's troubling me.
 I don't visit a doctor for it, and never did, although I respect medicine
 and doctors.
 Besides I'm extremely superstitious enough to respect medicine anyway,
 i am trained well enough not to be superstitious, but i am superstitious.
 No, I refuse to see a doctor out of hatred.
 You probably won't understand that.
 I do understand though.
 Of course I can't explain who exactly I hit with my rancor in this case,
 I am well aware that I have the
 Doctors don't touch or retaliate by any
 ask for help.
 I know better than anyone that all of this is only harming myself, and
 no one else. And yet, if I don't see a doctor, it's out of hatred. My liver is not good… let it get worse then! ”
 He's a civil servant, a low-level official, and he's retired because he's one
 small inheritance.
 He says, “When people came for information, to the table where I was sitting, I crunched
 with my teeth towards them, and I felt immense joy like
 I managed to make someone unhappy.
 I almost always managed.
 For the most part they were timid people, of course, they came to ask for something.
 But gentlemen, do you know what was my main concern about my resentment?
 Most importantly, the stinging of it, was the fact that I was there, even at times
 of the greatest anger, constantly aware within with shame that I
 not only was not grudging, but not even bitter, and I just
 arbitrarily trying to scare sparrows and entertain myself like that.
 I lied when I just said I was a hateful civil servant.
 I lied out of hatred.
 I was simply entertaining myself with the applicants and officials, and I.
 could never get really resentful.
 Every moment I was aware of many different elements within myself that were there
 were completely opposite to.
 I felt them swarming within myself, these opposing elements.
 I knew they had been swarming around in me all my life, and they were craving
 a way out, but I didn't let them out, purposely didn't let them
 to go outside.
 They tormented me until I was ashamed.
 They made me convulsive, and eventually made me sick.
 In the end they made me terribly sick.
 Do not think, gentlemen, that I am expressing remorse over anything now.
 That I ask forgiveness for something.
 I know you think so, but I assure you I don't care if you do.
 It wasn't just that it couldn't be hateful.
 I didn't know how to become anything, neither hateful nor kind.
 Neither a bad boy nor an honest man.
 Neither a hero nor an insect.
 Now I live my life in my corner, tormenting myself without rancor with the senseless
 consolation that an intelligent man cannot really become anything, and that it is only the fool
 is that becomes something. ”
 “To me an outspoken person is the real, normal man, like his sweetheart
 Mother Nature wished to see him when she graciously gave birth to him.
 I envy such a man until I see green.
 He's silly.
 I don't dispute that, but maybe the normal man must be stupid.
 How do you know that?
 Maybe that is actually very beautiful, and I am convinced by that suspicion (if
 one can call it that) by the fact that if you are the opposite of the normal man
 takes, the man with poignant self-awareness, who does not come from nature's womb,
 but from a quip.
 This is almost mystical gentlemen, but I suspect this too.
 This witticist man is sometimes so speechless in the presence of his
 opposite, the normal man, that he through all his exaggerated self-awareness himself
 generally looks like a mouse, and not at all as a man.
 It may be a very conscious mouse, but a mouse nonetheless.
 The other is a man, and so et cetera, et cetera.
 And worst of all, he actually sees himself as a mouse.
 No one is asking that of him, and that is an important point.

 Let's take a look at this mouse in action.
 Let's imagine he is offended, and he almost always feels offended, and he wants revenge too.

 There may be an even greater collection of resentment in him than in the natural and true man.

 The low and vicious desire to vent that resentment to his attacker is offensive
 him perhaps more persistent than the natural and true man.
 Because through his innate ignorance, the latter, the normal man, sees his revenge
 as simply righteous.
 But because of its strong self-awareness, the mouse does not believe in the unfortunate at all
 justice thereof.
 To finally arrive at the deed, the actual act of revenge, beyond the basic filth that the unfortunate
 mouse around it creates so much displeasure in the form of doubts and questions.
 It adds so many unsolved questions to one question, creating a horrible concoction all around,
 a smelly mess that consists of his doubts, feelings, and contempt of the
 straightforward men who can act, and stand sovereign as his judge and arbitrator,
 and laugh until they get stitches in their healthy side.
 All he can do is wave everything away with his paw,
 and with a smile of feigned disdain, which he doesn't really believe in,
 to crawl ashamed into his mouse hole.
 There in his dirty, smelly, underground home, our insulted, crushed, and mocked mouse
 suddenly engrossed in cold, malicious, and above all, endless resentment.
 For forty years he will remember his injury to the smallest, most
 shameful details, and each time he will add even more shameful details himself,
 hateful teasing and tormenting himself with his own imagination.
 He'll be ashamed of his own fantasies
 and yet remember everything, he will recall every detail over and over, invent unheard of things against himself,
 and pretend those things might have happened without forgiveness.
 Maybe he will start to avenge himself, but arbitrarily, as it were, on a trivial one
 manners, mundane, incognito, without believing in his right to revenge, or in it
 success of his revenge, knowing that he will go through all of his efforts
 for revenge will suffer a hundred times more than the person it is aimed at,
 and for whom (dare I say) it will hardly itch.
 On his deathbed he will remember everything,
 with accrued interest from the past years. ”
 The idea that Nietzsche and Dostoevsky developed was that emerging
 awareness in Western society of the mythological substructure of it
 value system, and the inability to conceptualize that, or the validity
 of that structure to prove by scientific means ... that the people who lived in that system are doomed by it
 could not be formally believed, and what they concluded was exactly what Dostoevsky just described,
 namely, that someone with that form of intense self-awareness and cultural self-knowledge immediately
 would become extremely fragmented, incapable of action, unhappy, bitter and dangerous.
 And both Dostoevsky and Nietzsche, in their works, and Dostoevsky developed this idea
 in particular in a novel called "Demons," said that once you got to that point,
 which was inevitable if you were smart enough to take seriously what's going on
 hand, it was only a very small step towards identification with a murderous ideology.
 Some of the existentialists started working on what you consider a solution for
 could see that problem.
 I'm going to read Kierkegaard's solution.
 "It is now…"
 Kierkegaard was a Danish existentialist philosopher, and he lived for Nietzsche, and he was
 in a sense ... you can think of him as the first modern psychologist.
 He was the first person to be, for example, the separate entity of tension and
 despair conceptualized.
 “It's been about four years since I got the idea to see if I could become a writer,

 I remember it well, it was on a Sunday.

 Yes, a Sunday afternoon.

 I sat out, as usual, in the café in the garden of Frederiksberg.
 I was a student for about ten years then. Although I was never lazy, what I did nonetheless resembled a sparkling nothingness
 do, an occupation for which I still have great weakness,
 and in which I may even excel somewhat.
 I read a lot, spent the rest of the day lounging and pondering, or pondering and lounging,

 but that was all. So I sat there and smoked my cigar, when I was lost in thought.
 I remember these from several thoughts.
 You're starting to be an old man I said to myself
 without being anything and without actually doing anything.
 On the other hand, if you look around the literature and life, you will see the celebrated names and figures,
 the esteemed and praised men,
 who acquire a place and are much discussed.
 “The benefactors of this time who know how to help humanity through life
 ever easier. Some by railways, others by horse-drawn wagons and steamers,
 others with the telegraph, others with understandable compendia and small lists of all kinds of information.
 Finally, the true benefactors of our time make the spiritual life ever easier,
 and at the same time more meaningful. And what do you do?
 Then my monologue was interrupted, because my cigar was finished and one had to be
 new ones are lit.
 So I smoked again, and suddenly the following thought came to mind.
 You have to do something, but with your limited capabilities it will be impossible to
 something even easier than it already is. You must, with the same humanitarian enthusiasm as the others,
 try to make something more difficult.
 I was very pleased with that idea, and at the same time I was flattered by the thought that I,
 like those others, would be loved and esteemed by the whole community.
 Because when all people work together in every possible way to make everything easier
 only one possible danger remains. Namely that the convenience becomes so great,
 that at some point it gets too big. Then only one defect remains, although it does not become yet
 felt like lack.
 When people lack difficulties ... out of charity and out
 despair because of my embarrassing situation, because I saw that I had achieved nothing, and not
 was able to make something even easier than it already was, and moved by a genuine interest in those who make everything easy,
 I imagined it would be my job to create difficulties everywhere. ”
 This is the same idea, worded differently.
 "A traveler ..."
 This is Nietzsche, and it is one
 part of the development of an answer to the problems he had raised.
 “A traveler who had seen many countries, peoples and continents was asked what human characteristics
 he had found everywhere, and he replied, "People tend to be idle."
 Some might think he should have said, 'They are
 all timid. ' They hide behind customs and opinions.
 Within every person knows very well that he is in this world only once, if
 something unique, and that no coincidence, no matter how strange, will such a unity be a second time
 making such a peculiar and scattered multitude. He knows, but hides
 it as a bad conscience. Why?
 Because of fear of his neighbor, who stands up to use and veils himself with it.
 But what is it that makes the individual man fear his neighbor?
 To think and act like a flock, and not be happy with oneself?
 A sense of shame, perhaps, on rare occasions.
 In the vast majority, it is the desire for convenience.
 Immobility, in short, that tendency to laziness of which the traveler spoke.
 He is right. People are more lazy than timid.
 What they fear most are the problems with which unconditional honesty and nakedness would burden them.
 Only artists hate this careless life with borrowed manners and somewhat
 appropriate opinions, and reveal the secret, everyone's wrong conscience. The idea that
 every person is a unique miracle. They have the guts to show us humans to the fullest
 the last muscle. He, and he alone. More so, that in this rigorous continuous uniqueness,
 he is beautiful and admirable,
 new and incredible like everything nature does, not boring in any way. ”
 “If a great thinker despises men, it is their loudness that he despises. Because that makes them look like products from a factory,
 and indifferent, and unworthy of companionship or teaching.
 The person who does not want to belong to the masses only has to stop feeling comfortable with himself.
 Let him follow his conscience, crying out to him.
 Be yourself.
 What you do, find, and desire at the moment, you are not really. ”
 That is Nietzsche, Dostoevsky and existentialism.
 That is the beginning of their thinking.