I am no longer an atheist.
 Because I no longer see the world this way.
 I am not a materialist (philosophical doctrine) anymore.
 I don't think the world is made of matter.
 I believe the world is made of what matters.
 It is made of meaning.
 Look at it from the point of view of modern neuroscience.
 Look at what we're heading to, subconsciously.
 In other words, what attracts our attention. It is the meaning.
 The meaning that grabs our attention before we know what it is.
 The brain behaves as if the world is made of information or meaning.
 Heidegger, for example, is a German philosopher
 He was convinced that the world was essentially made of meaning.
 And people's primary interaction with existence was the interaction with meaning.
 This is not what modern humans believe, being too materialistic.
 If you went past 400 or 500 years ago
 And I understood what people mean when they say "substance"
 It is what makes everything -
 You will see that what they think about the meaning of the material is not what we think about it.
 Their definition of matter was not in this physical form; The kind of dirt that everything is made of.
 The definition was more complicated than this.
 The problem with the normal perception of matter is that
 It does not address the fact that matter appears in the form of arrays and patterns.
 These shapes are lost if matter is thought of as atoms.
 And that this is the entirety of reality, and that this is the entirety of the interaction.
 "in the beginning"
 God created Adam and Eve in his image and likeness.
 There are many interpretations of the first creature created by God.
 There is a tradition in medieval Christianity and Judaism that:
 The first human being was a bisexual: male and female together.
 They were separated and made in the constant hope of being together.
 There is a deep psychological idea here that states:
 The union of male and female is the product of a perfect kidney.
 And this can be expressed biologically.
 We know that the male needs the female and that masculinity needs femininity.
 You can think of it as different aspects of the psyche.
 Or between people and different aspects of the psyche that exist within people.
 So whatever consciousness is
 It comes in the male and female embodiment.
 Both incarnations are equal representations of God.
 Which I think is important.
 Because there is that endless criticism of feminism
 Western tradition is based on the assumption that the entire temple is masculine.
 And I don't think this is true.
 Because if he were masculine, the man would have been created in the image of God.
 And he is clearly wrong.
 Masculinity and femininity, in addition to their expression of sexual identity,
 Expressive ratings.
 The expressive female classification is the birthplace of things. uterus.
 The female is associated with the essential aspect of an efficient production process.
 It is from the female that new shapes come out.
 For example: New forms emerge from what you do not understand
 This is the womb of existence.
 New biological forms emerging from a female substrate; Any females.
 The male side is more creative, symbolically speaking.
 The idea of ​​creativity is the trigger.
 The idea also expresses in mythology logical clarity and cut.
 While femininity expresses something complete and undifferentiated.
 There are those who believe that in the story of Adam and Eve that the woman is
 The first participant of the food.
 I think this is related in some way to her ability to make Adam conscious.
 Which you actually do!
 I gave him something that made him conscious.
 What made her aware of herself as well
 Women make men conscious.
 You cannot find a truer truth than this.
 This is a result of their being selective and also their rejection of most men.
 "Shame on Adam"
 God appeared and was looking for Adam; He used to walk around with him,
 And Adam was hiding behind the bushes.
 Which indicates the low level of intelligence of Adam.
 you know; God sees through the bushes.
 But it also indicates his level of self-awareness.
 It means that when Adam became aware of himself
 He no longer believed in the fact that he was in the image of God
 Enough to give him status.
 God said to him: "Whoever teach you that you are naked."
 Really here is the fall of Adam.
 Adam said it was the woman and her mother.
 And it is really satisfying.
 "The woman you brought with me is she gave me"
 Yes, I made you self-conscious.
 Hurrah. I knew you woke up.
 There is something to be said about this.
 The woman tortures the man in order to wake him up.
 And I don't think that's always grateful.
 'Paradise lost'
 John Milton wrote Paradise Lost for two reasons:
 The first is to justify God's ways to people.
 The second reason for his writings is the arrangement of mythology stories that were marginal to ecclesiastical Christianity
 In one coherent narrative.
 Here is a question he tried to answer:
 If God was all-knowing, why did he create Adam and Eve despite knowing their fall?
 Milton has a complex response to this question;
 Man has free will.
 Even if God knows the fall of man,
 There was nothing to do except
 Take their free will.
 But freedom of will was so important that its taking could not happen.
 Dostoevsky points out that freedom is extremely important to people.
 Even arbitrary freedoms.
 People want freedom even if it is chased by disasters. People hate the rules.
 They are willing to sacrifice anything for freedom.
 God’s judgment was: Freedom is better than protection.
 "Why a snake?"
 The snake in the Garden of Eden is an important character
 Humans and chimpanzees, the closest biological species,
 They are naturally feared and attracted to reptiles.
 Where an area of ​​the brain called the amygdala is involuntarily activated.
 That has to do with stress.
 I think the evolutionary reason for this is that mammals and reptiles kept at war during an environmental race
 For about 60 to 200 million years.
 Cold-blooded reptile qualities,
 Pierced eyes, pointed teeth, and night walks.
 Located outside, where the unknown is. Where there is chaos.
 The snake is kind of a symbol of the unknown.
 And it is a contradictory adjective
 You use it in mythology, for example:
 Dragon in Western Culture
 It is a negative thing, but in Chinese culture
 It is a positive thing.
 The unknown is like a dragon here, it is negative and positive.
 The snake in the Garden of Eden
 It is a symbol of all those things that appear
 When you think you know what you're doing.
 And when you think that you are aware of what you are doing
 You are that little heaven in which you live.
 But there will still be something coming out for you. And it's those things that you don't care about.
 It's the snake. And when this snake appears, we panic.
 When a snake appears we want to stay away from it
 But we are still curious, wanting to check it out.
 When a chimpanzee collides with a snake in the woods, it triggers a distinct cry.
 She claims the wrath of the snake.
 And chimpanzees, which do not like snakes, do not run away from snakes
 Rather, it goes back and monitors it.
 They do not take their eyes off the object.
 Some of them are staring for ten minutes. Some are staring for hours.
 The unknown is wonderful! We cannot take our eyes off him.
 We must confront him even if he is terrifying.
 It is one of the reasons teenagers are so popular with horror movies.
 They are driven by the desire to watch the snake.
 They want to deal with the snake.
 In Genesis, of course, dealing with a serpent was the end of bliss.
 Just as it happens in reality.
 There are some beliefs that the serpent in Eden was Satan trying to destroy God's work.
 People often look at their past and say:
 Do you know? I was expelled from my paradise because of that event.
 But looking at it again, it made me more mature.
 Whatever the case, he is the snake in Eden.
 He definitely plays this role. It is a catalyst.
 Most of what is unknown is sacrifice. Most of it gives salvation to life.
 They provide excitement and warrant pain.