So while you guys were gone, I went on Wikipediaand looked up Osiris, because when I did the
research for this book it certainly wasn’tpossible to get access to that kind of information
instantaneously. And the stories that arelaid out in there… there’s a thread that
runs the stories that are laid out there,that’s quite similar to the one I told you,
but there’s all sorts of details that arevery radically different. And so, I don’t
really know what to say about that. And youknow, part of the reason that people like
Joseph Campbell and Carl Jung and… therewas an original anthropologist, an armchair
anthropologist, who wrote a book called TheGolden Bough, whose name escapes me momentarily
[it’s Sir James George Frazer], but it wasone of the first attempts to do a cross-cultural
categorisation of mythology, and to look forunderlying commonalities. Now the problem
is, you know I told you about Naomi Kleingoing down to Argentina and looking at the
factory through her particular lens. The problemis that when you develop a lens and then you
look at things through it, you may just seewhat that lens heightens, you know, and I
think that’s a criticism that could be leveledagainst the sorts of things that I’m telling
you about. You know, that I’ve cherry-pickedcertain stories and interpreted them in certain
ways so that they fall coherently into a schemeof thought. And so I’ll tell you some of
the things that I do methodologically to protectmyself against that, insofar as that’s possible.
So there is this idea in psychology calledthe multimethod-multitrait method of construct
validation, which is, you know, a God-awfulagglomeration of jargon. But it actually means
something. And it was the construction oftwo psychologists back in the late 1950s,
Cronbach and Meehl, who were interested inwhat psychologists meant when they said something
existed. Like say, anger. Is that a real thing?Well what do you mean, ‘thing’? What is
it that you’re talking about? What is anger,exactly? I don’t mean as ‘anger’, but
as an idea. What sort of idea is the ideaof anger or the idea of anxiety or the idea
of sadness? Or the idea of self-esteem orself-competence or any of these things that
psychologists talk about as if they’re realities.Well, some realities are very tangible, right,
and it’s somewhat easy to come to agreementabout the contours of their existence, and
the borders, but other things are way moredifficult than that. And so their idea was
that if something actually existed, you shouldbe able to measure it multiple ways, using
multiple techniques, and still get the sameanswer. And so, your senses do that. You have
five of them. And the reason you have five,apparently, is because evolution has determined
that if you only had four you’d die moreoften. So it seems as if you have five separate
sources of information that all lead to thesame conclusion. You can be relatively certain
that the conclusion’s that reached is real.Well, the multimethod-multitrait method is
an application of that idea to construct validation,which is like… you could think of anger
as an idea, as a construct, it’s a terminologicalissue. You just define it as a construct,
a psychological construct. How do you knowif they’re real? Well the idea is it’s
very complicated. You have to measure themin multiple ways. All the ways you measure
them have to give the same reading. Then youhave to show that that idea is the same in
certain ways as other ideas that it’s relatedto and different from other ideas that it’s
not related. So let me give an example. There’sa construct: ‘neuroticism’. And you might
say, well there’s another construct: ‘depression’.Well then you might say, “well are those
separate or are they the same?” Well that’sa tough one, because in many, many ways they’re
the same. Are they different in any importantways? Well, the way you do that technically
is you would measure neuroticism however youwere going to measure it. Maybe I’d have
you tell me how neurotic you were using aquestionnaire, and then I’d have your friend
tell me and maybe your parent, so we’vegot a pretty good triangulation on your neuroticism.
Then I have them do the same thing, all thosepeople do the same thing with regards to your
levels of depression and anxiety. Then I’duse both those measures to predict something
else, like how well your life goes in termsof career over the next ten years. And if
neuroticism predicted and depression predicted,so they were correlated, then I’d think
well there’s some relationship. Then I’dlook at them at the same time. If I predict
with neuroticism and then I add depressionto the mix, does that give me more predictive
power. It’s sort of like does A = C or doesA + B = C? That’s all you’re asking in
a regression equation, roughly speaking. Wellif A = C is just as good as A + B = C, especially
if the two things are also correlated (depression/anxietyand neuroticism are going to be very highly
correlated, like 0.7, something like that),you might say well those are the same things.
Just because they have different names, it’snot helped. And part of it is, it’s a pragmatic
conceptualisation of reality, it’s like,is this categorisation structure good for
something?Okay, so anyways, I’ll unpack all that and
say, well part of my rules for determiningwhether these things were useful or not was
to see if the ideas apply across multiplelevels of analysis. So that’s why I told
you about the conceptual, so that’s sortof the cognitive psychology, and then the
neuropsychological, so there’s some inputof brain research. And then the narrative
or mythological, and then the cross-culturaland think well those all stack up in a certain
way so that if you look between all of themyou can see a pattern. And it seems to me
increasingly unlikely that that pattern wouldbe there across all of those levels at the
same time. Now you could say well, you knowthat depends on how good you are at weaving
a story. But at some point, encapsulatingthat many phenomena and weaving a coherent
story out of them if such a thing doesn’texist, it seems to me to become cognitively
impossible. You just can’t do it unlessthere’s actually something there. And of
course everything I tell you also is a simplification.It has to be. Because you could spend your
whole life investigating any of the thingswe’re talking about and so what I’m hoping
is I’ve extracted out the central issuesof these multiple levels of analysis and put
together, each of them support all the others.Anyways, who knows? You know, I don’t know,
but so far so good. Okay so this is a coolrepresentation, I really like this one. This
is called The Open Virgin. And it’s a 14thor 13th century sculpture, if I remember correctly.
It’s made out of wood. And these thingswere actually… this isn’t the only one
of them. They were a form of religious interpretationthat had different exemplars. You could find
different ones of them online. This is brilliant,this bloody thing, as far as I’m concerned.
So let me show you this figure again. So basicallywhat you have here, in this figure, this is
a world conception. And the world conceptionis roughly: there’s an individual, positive
and negative, he or she is in a cultural spherethat’s positive or negative, that’s embedded
in the world outside of culture, that’spositive and negative, and all of it comes
from potential. That’s the idea.Now, this map shows all of the positives and
negatives in relationship to one another,and you see it’s not perfectly symmetrical
and the reason for that is, as far as I cantell, the adversarial element of the individual
is the thing that generates the tyrannicalelement of culture. And that’s the thing
that gets in your way of establishing a creativerelationship with what you don’t know. Well,
anyways. Here is a manifestation of that,I believe. And I like this manifestation because…
like, it’s obviously Christian, but notexactly. It’s more mythological than Christian.
And the reason for that, well, is quite obvious.So the superordinate figure is Mary, the feminine.
Now you think, well it’s amazing the personwho carved this didn’t get burnt up at the
Inquisition, because it’s a radical idea,but it’s just an indication of how the mythology
can change the causal relationship betweenthese different elements.
So you have Mary there, she’s the ultimatein femininity, the ultimate feminine deity,
but only the positive side. And then withinher, so it’s like Nature opens itself up,
benevolent Nature opens itself up, and whatyou see inside is culture, that’s God the
Father, holding the individual, and the individualin this case is the crucified Christ, which
is a wonderful conceptualisation as far asI’m concerned, because of course that is
what life does to people, that’s why that’ssuch a powerful symbol. It’s like, you know,
Christ is the person who has to face the realityof his own death, voluntarily or involuntarily,
who’s betrayed by his culture, betrayedby his friends, it’s sort of like he’s
exposed to the most torturous elements ofindividual being. And simultaneously, at least
in principle, transcends them. Well it’slike you bloody well better do that because
otherwise, well what’s going to happen?You’re done if you don’t do that. And
it’s even worse, it’s not only that youfail, that’s just the beginning of it. If
you can’t transcend the tragedy of yourbeing then you get corrupted. I see this happening
to people happening all the time.So you know, if you’re suffering and you
can’t cope with it, generally speaking whathappens is that it embitters you. And once
you get bitter you get resentful, and onceyou get resentful you look for revenge. And
that can just get completely out of hand.Now that’s a quick trip to the worst suburb
of the Underworld, that’s for sure. So youknow, it’s not only that if you don’t
manage this transcendent act that you’reswamped by the tragedy of your life. You’re
swamped by the tragedy of your life, and thenthat corrupts you, and then you start working
to make everything even more tragic than ithas to be. And so I think that’s why in
medieval Christian conceptualisations in particular,the idea of hell, the idea that you were destined
to hell was worse than the idea of dying.And it’s a strange idea, you know, because
you think (this is what the terror managementtheorists think too) is that “there’s
nothing worse than the fear of death!” It’slike, that’s wrong. They don’t have the
right imagination. There are lots of thingsthat are worse than the fear of death. I’m
not trying to trivialise the fear of death,obviously, but I don’t think it’s very
difficult to understand that there are somethings that you would rather die than do.
I mean I’m sure that I could get you guysto sit for fifteen minutes and say okay, list
ten things that you would rather die thando. That’s easy. Especially if you’re
a parent. You can think of those things inlike no time flat.
Okay so that’s pretty interesting. So you’vegot the superordinate feminine figure here,
which is not what you would expect from aChristian representation, right? You’d expect
God to be on the outside, and then Mary andthen Christ, in all likelihood, although that
would also be a valid representation. Becauseyou can think of the mother as something that’s
protected by the culture. And supporting theindividual, because that’s basically what
this representation shows. But then you seeon the open sides, I really like this, I think
it’s so cool, is that you’ve got all thesepeople who aren’t archetypal figures, they’re
in a little crowd. And they’re gazing atthe central figure. And of course that’s
exactly what’s happened in Christianityfor two thousand years, right, insofar as
it has spread, is that for two thousand yearspeople have been looking at that image, which
is the crucifixion, transfixed by it. Wellwhy? Well, you know, for reasons that we don’t
understand. When everybody woke up in thelate 1800s and said, “why were we looking
at that for the last two thousand years?”the first answer was “well we really don’t
have the foggiest idea”. It was just oneof the things that we did, roughly speaking.
It encapsulated people within the belief system.So that’s another good example, anyway,
of how this archetypal imagery can manifestitself, say spontaneously, in the imagination
of an artist. And the thing is, that’s asacred image. And it is an actuality, that’s
what it is. What it shows is, well there’sa superordinate, transcendent, natural order
that has a beneficial element that we associatewith femininity, and inside that there’s
a supportive culture that’s properly nestedif things are organised properly. And it’s
both of those things that provide supportfor the suffering individuals. It’s like
yeah, that’s pretty much got it. Now thatdoesn’t exhaust the meaning of this particular
representation, there’s a lot more to itthan that, but just that is not so bad.
And then, you know I can show you a more negativerepresentation, I think I’ve shown you this
before. Like this would be a representationof the negative element of the feminine. And
so you have Kali here, and Kali is the goddessto whom you make sacrifices and hopefully
if you make the right sacrifices, then Kaliturns into her positive counterpart. And you
know, you think, well that’s a… what…how does sacrifice affect your relationship
with the gods? Well first of all there’sno gods and second of all, well then what
the hell are you doing with the sacrifices?But it’s pretty straightforward. We’ve
already talked about this at length. You domake sacrifices, all the time. And what that
means is that you act as if you can have arelationship with being. You assume that if
you withhold certain things from yourselfnow, that you will improve your relationship,
both with nature and with culture. And I alreadytold you guys that as far as I was concerned
that was the most stunning cognitive discoveryof mankind. It’s the discovery of the future.
And it’s the discovery of the relationshipbetween the present and the future. You know
it’s such an amazing idea, that you canalter your behaviour now, and it’ll pay
off in a year. God, that’s not obvious.It’s certainly not… animals don’t think
that way. You know, some of them act thatway, like bees and so on, but that’s just
built right into their behaviour, as far aswe can tell.
So anyway, so there’s Kali. And you know,she’s a spider. She’s in a web of fire.
The fire is outside a web that’s made outof skulls. She’s got weapons in her hand,
her hair is on fire. She’s got a headdressof skulls. I mean, if you ever saw something
like that it would traumatise you so badlyyou wouldn’t be able to get out of your
house for like five years. That’s exactlywhat it is. That’s what it is. It’s a
representation of all of that that would traumatiseyou if you encountered it. And you know, it’s
an attempt to encapsulate that as an image,and what you could say, in some sense, is
that the people who developed this image wereattempting to conceptualise the class of all
terrifying things. And once you get the classof all terrifying things conceptualised, you
could come up with the class of all usefulresponses. And that would be something like
the proper way to behave, and sacrifice isan integral element of that. It’s like yeah,
absolutely. Absolutely dead on. Unless youdon’t believe that sacrifice works, in which
case, what the hell are you doing here? Imean, you know, you act out your belief. And
it’s a firm belief. And you would also saythat if things fell apart so badly that sacrifice
no longer paid off, your life would basicallybecome intolerable. Because it would mean
that you would have abandoned all sense ofcontrol over the outcomes of your actions.
Well you can’t live like that, you’d justdie of stress. Well and as I said, she was
pregnant, she’s given birth to this unfortunatecharacter, who she’s devouring intestines
first. Like it’s a rough image. It’s animage of the destructive element of nature.
And so that’s the negative side of the feminine,we might say.
There’s a positive representation. Thisis a Greek representation. That’s Diana,
or Artemis. I’m hoping I’m rememberingthis properly. She’s multi-breasted. This
circle around her head is undoubtedly a representationof her cosmic nature. So it’s like a halo
but the halo is basically a planetary bodylike the Sun… a cosmic body like the Sun
or the Moon behind the head of the divineindividual with all of that power shining
forward. So it’s an attempt to use… youknow, if you look up at the Moon or you look
up at the Sun, there’s an element that’scharacterised by awe. You can’t help but
feel that, at least its beauty and power,and sometimes it’s overwhelming. Well, you
take the representation of the personalityand you throw the representation of these
cosmic powers behind it, and it’s an attemptto represent transcendent value. It’s very
intelligent. It’s brilliant, in fact. Andso partly what you’re trying to do as you
conduct your life is you’re trying to getall of these archetypal forces in proper balance.
And I suppose in some sense to get them tiltedtowards the good, if that’s possible. I
mean, that’s what this representation insome sense, you might say… [looks for picture]…
yeah, you might say well if you got everythingordered properly, this is what being would
be like. Still pretty rough, given that thecrucifix is at its centre.
Now I don’t know, you know, if you thinkabout it from a purely technical perspective,
roughly speaking, each of these archetypesis split into positive and negative. You might
say, well, that’s just how it is. Thereis no way that you can interact with all of
them so that the whole system tilts towardsthe positive, you know. But I don’t think
that’s true. I think you can get them linedup so that things tilt towards the positive.
And I think you can detect when that happens,because those are the periods in your life
where you feel that you’re richly enoughengaged in what you’re doing and life is
meaningful enough, so that the rest of it,the substructure that makes it necessary,
is worth it. It’s worthwhile, you know,that the negative exists is okay given the
way that things are structured.Now I think that whether or not that’s true
is in some sense the eternal question of mankind.Can you organise your life so that it’s
good? Well, it seems like you can certainlyallow your life to degenerate so that it’s
terrible. That seems indisputable, right,and there does seem to be an element of choice
in that, although, you know something terriblecan happen to you that you have no choice
of or control over. But it certainly seemsthat you could do any number of stupid and
blind things that make everything worse. Ithink that’s common experience. And I also
think you’d be hard-pressed to find anyonewho wouldn’t say that there were things
they did consciously and willingly, that wereof their own choice, that they didn’t have
to do, that made things worse. So we seemto have some sense of our moral agency. And
we seem automatically to accept some responsibilityfor the outcomes of our actions. And so partly
what that means is that we do believe thatwe can make things better or worse. And I
suppose in some way that means that we believewe can tap the whole archetypal structure
of being into the positive. Well I would sayif you drill down to the bottom of existentialism,
in some sense, that’s the question thatthe existentialists pose, you know. Is there
a manner of conducting your life such thatit becomes… it’s not merely acceptable,
it’s more than that. You’d say yes, thisis how it should be.
What we’re going to do now, although we’renot going to do it today, is we’re going
to start talking about other representationsof this sub-structure from other religious
traditions. And we’re going to also talkabout ways that you might relate to these
figures. Because one question might be, wellyou’re part of your culture, and it’s
got an orderly element, and a protective element,and a tyrannical element. Okay so what should
you do about that? You know, should you…the tyrannical element is real and it’s
corrupt and blind, and so to the degree thatyou identify with that, when you’re tyrannical
and corrupt and blind, but by the same tokenyou’re the fortunate beneficiary of tens
of thousands of years of cultural and technologicalevolution and effort. And it seems to me that,
you know, you should be at least appropriatelygrateful for that. And so then you’re in
a real position, because you have to be gratefuland happy for the thing that tyrannises and
controls you. Well, okay, that’s not aneasy thing to figure out, because those things
seem to conflict. So what exactly should yourrelationship to culture be? Well, I think
there are myths that describe that quite directly.And they take into account the corruption.
It’s not a whitewash. It’s like yes ofcourse this thing is dead and blind and corrupt.
Obviously. And you know, it’s foolishnessand wilfulness… it’s ignorance and wilful
blindness that make it that way, as well asthings merely getting old and falling apart.
So the fact that there’s some malevolenceat the bottom of it is also true. Should you
flee from that? Well, that isn’t what themyths say. They say what you’re supposed
to do is, just like Pinocchio, you’re supposedto go to the bottom of the ocean, to the most
monstrous possible part, and rescue your father.That’s what you have to do before you become
an individual.And I can’t see how that can’t be right.
In fact, I think that’s what you’re doingin university, if you’re actually getting
a university education. What you’re hereto do is sift through the dead remnants of
the past and pull up what’s vital, that’sso sophisticated and complex that there’s
no way that you’d be able to think it upfor yourself. But you know, it requires you
as the discriminating agent. You know, ifyou read someone like Nietzsche or you read
someone like Freud, there’s lots to throwaway. It isn’t what you throw away though,
it’s what you keep that matters. And tobe a discriminating reader means that you
get rid of the dead matter and you keep thegold. And you build yourself up a storehouse
of gold, and then you can live in the world.And people often ask, what’s the purpose
of getting a degree in the humanities? Wellthe answer to that is that if you’re properly
trained in the humanities, you know how tolive. Now that’s the same as having a job,
and you need to have a job. But you know,knowing how to live is a more important thing
than having a job, even though having a jobis an important thing. And the reason for
that is that if you don’t know how to livethen things fall apart. And that’s not good.
And they can really fall apart, you know,and part of the reason I think that this became
so much of an obsession for me is that I believethat we don’t have a lottery of… we are
narrowing… we’ve become so powerful thatthe consequence of our blindness is reaching
uncontrollable proportions. If you’re weakand stupid, well you know, there’s only
so much damage you can do. But we’re notweak, not at all. We have unbelievable power
at our disposal now, and a lot of weird thingsare going to come down the pipes in the next
ten years.The more people that have their act together,
the better. Because then things will be tiltedtowards everything lining up in a positive
direction rather than being tilted in theother direction. And that’s important. And
I think people can make a very powerful individualcontribution to that, wherever you happen
to be. You know, all of these myths alwayssay the same thing. They say that the future
of the world depends on individual choice.And I think that’s literally true. So then
you might think, well you better put yourselfin a position where you make wise choices,
because if you don’t… we’ve alreadyseen what happens. We got a taste in the 20th
century. So, if you want some more of that,you could certainly have it.