Well, now we're going to talk about the phenomenological, existentialist / phenomenological
 psychiatrists and their theories from the 1950s, and as I have noted before,
 much of their thinking was motivated by what happened during World War II.
 The last time I gave you a lecture, I described the summary of Nietzsche and Dostoevsky
 about the situation of the world and the psychological situation of the world at the end
 of the nineteenth century. And that was that our new ways of thinking had undermined our faith,
 and our old ways of thinking. And that was a problem because people need something
 on which they can build, and to orient themselves and move forward. Nietzsche and Dostoevsky
 both predicted that the result of that breakup was more likely
 would be on nihilism, and all that that entails.
 Dostoevsky wrote about this quite extensively in a book entitled "Notes from the Underground."
 If any of you are interested in it, especially in clinical psychology,
 you should really read this book because it is one of the most brilliant psychological studies
 once written to a mentally disturbed man.
 It is very precise, and there are parts of “Guilt and Penance” that are also true.

 I think the way they depict psychological phenomena is unsurpassed.
 I don't know how he did it ... I mean Dostoevsky was epileptic, I don't know if
 you know, but he was arrested by the Tsar's men in the late nineteenth century for being a revolutionist student.
 They threw him in jail in Moscow, and one day they put him
 in front of a firing squad and shot him six in the morning, but they used blanks,
 which of course he didn't know.
 He was so shocked by this that he developed epilepsy (which is possible, by the way).
 He then had epilepsy for the rest of his life, but he had a peculiar type of epilepsy,
 which is actually not very rare. Some people who have epilepsy
 experience a phenomenon they call an “aura”, which is an altered form of consciousness,
 before the seizure starts, and those auras can be very strange.
 I once read about a man, his aura was that his hand was possessed by demons
 from hell and he could feel the possession creeping up his arm, to his shoulder,
 and when it got to his head, he had an epileptic fit.
 There is another case, this man had an aura where a double appeared behind him,
 But when he turned to look, he had a seizure,
 but if he didn't turn to look, then he didn't.
 Such brain disorders are strange things, because the system is disrupted
 lives, and is capable of many extremely remarkable deviant behavior.
 Either way, Dostoevsky's aura was an aura that revealed the world. What Dostoevsky experienced
 was that the meaning of things got deeper and deeper and deeper,
 and the moment he would discover the secret of all things,
 he had an epileptic fit.
 But he said the quality of his experience during the aura was so high, so overwhelming,
 and so deep that he would have exchanged all his normal experiences
 for those experiences. And he had them repeatedly.
 I really think this broadening of his vision and concepts is due to epilepsy
 transformed him, among other things.
 He had been through some damn tough things as he spent a long time in prison with rapists
 and murderers in Siberia, although he was some kind of aristocrat.
 He had a rough time, and I imagine that expanded his thinking too,
 since he survived. But I really think his epileptic insight was essential
 for his unsurpassed genius, so his aura ... Other people also experience epileptic auras,
 such symptoms, and some people are so fascinated with the aura
 that they are not taking drugs for epilepsy because they do not want to miss the experience
 that precedes the aura, or the epileptic seizure.
 And Dostoevsky's experiences, the awesome element of the aura, is also relevant to
 what we're going to talk about today. Because both Binswanger and Boss were very interested in
 how meaning manifests itself in the world.
 And they had opposite explanations.
 I actually think they are parallel statements, but the meaning that Dostoevsky experienced
 is an enlargement of the normal way in which meaning is revealed in the world.
 And people experience things like that in different forms of altered consciousness.
 Anyway, Binswanger and Boss mainly worked in the 1950s, and like I said, they were
 very concerned about what happened in World War II.
 In fact, Dostoevsky and Nietzsche predicted that it would become nihilism, or
 ideological totalitarianism, which is exactly what happened. By the time 1930 appeared,
 the Germans had gone through a terrible First World War.

 And then they got insane hyperinflation.
 In the 1920s, Germany underwent that, in part because they had to pay such large debts for it
 the first World War.
 German inflation reached the point where it literally exceeded one hundred million marks
 had to pay for a loaf of bread.
 They took wheelbarrows with money to the grocer.
 What happened was the value of their money fell to zero, and it does
 more often than you think with economies.
 The value is zero, and that was it, then a restart, as it were.
 The war was terrible, and hundreds of thousands of men had been killed
 or damaged.
 Then their economy collapsed.
 And at the same time, or a little earlier, the Russian revolution took place,
 at the end of World War I, and communism was
 came to power, and the communists stirred all over Europe, and in North America.
 And their goal was to bring about a worldwide communist revolution.
 So the Germans went crazy because the communists would take over the country, which is a great deal
 was reasonable anxiety. And instead, fascism arose, and fascism was
 a form of totalitarianism, and I think the Germans were desperate for order at the time.

 And that's what the fascists offered, at least in theory.
 Unfortunately it turned out that they offered them a bit too much order,
 or maybe way too much order, and it went downhill.
 Then the whole world had to experience the horrors of World War II, and it was shocking
 in many different ways. Not just because of the brutal warfare,
 but because of the deliberate genocidal practices of the Nazis.
 And those practices were difficult to understand in several ways.
 This is why it was hard to understand: there were times
 detailing the cruelty faced by the Nazis with their theoretical enemies
 destroyed, went far beyond the mere necessity of destruction.
 Worse, it went beyond destruction to actual, ceaseless torture.
 And not only that, there were many situations where the Nazis (especially when the end of
 war was approaching) had to decide whether they would continue to eradicate
 Jews, Gypsies and homosexuals, and any people they don't believe in
 heard their culture, or that they would win the war.
 They had to make decisions about the distribution of resources.
 If they continued with the murderous extermination, it would lessen the odds
 that they would win the war.
 This was often the case, especially at the end of the war, and the Nazis always opted for persistence
 of destruction.
 That is very interesting because you might think that
 if they fight for one belief, namely world domination, it is extermination
 a step towards the ultimate goal, the establishment of a world state,
 a fascist world state, or at least a fascist European state.
 Then you would think that the attempts at extermination are subordinate to that goal,
 if they really pursued the goal they said they were pursuing.
 But there is an old psychoanalytic idea that is very valuable, it is like
 surgical tool, and I would say if you were to use it in your own life you should proceed with caution,
 because you don't want to perform unnecessary surgery.
 The rule is (I think it is a Jungian rule, but I don't remember
 where I read it): If you can't understand why someone is doing something, check it out
 the consequences of his actions, whatever they may be, and determine the motivation based on it
 of the consequences.
 So when you see someone who seems to be doing nothing but the people around him
 and make yourself miserable, and you can't understand why, then one of the hypotheses
 that you can try to make the lives of all the people around him and himself impossible.

 And that, in fact, is his goal.
 People find these things difficult to understand because when we see things
 Like the kids who messed up on Columbine, we always assume those people do those things because of
 reasons other than those that appear to be the obvious motivations,
 or the reasons they themselves give for their actions. Because the "Columbine Killers," sure
 the more eloquent, has spelled out exactly why he did what he did.
 That is crystal clear.
 You just need to read on the internet what he said, he told you what he was up to.

 But people don't like to think that way because they don't believe anyone
 could be under the spell of malice without any other cause.
 Like he'd been bullied at school, an outsider, and those things
 applied to him only partially, and not to any particular degree,
 compared to how other people in high school are bullied and an outsider.
 It will be about ten percent, probably more in the direction of thirty percent. That doesn't mean that schools are constantly exploding.

 It is a completely inadequate statement.
 Either way, people get possessed by very strict ideological ideas.

 They became so obsessed with such ideas that they were willing to do things
 which you would think would be completely impossible for theoretically civilized people.
 It turned out that such acts were possible not only for civilized people,
 but that the people themselves, especially in Nazi Germany, knew what was going on
 was going on.
 You can't remove millions of people from a population without rumors circulating,
 and we must not forget that Hitler was elected.
 He was elected by a large majority.
 It was an enormous majority, like no modern Democratic leader ever gets.
 So while it is difficult for people to accept, it is difficult
 so as not to hold every part of German society accountable for what happened.
 You cannot blame it on the leaders… this is something to do
 think about it when it comes to Hitler. Because one of the things you may ask yourself is
 how he could be so convincing to his audience.
 I'll give you an explanation.
 Let's assume a few things.
 The first assumption is: there were many hateful Germans.
 Why?
 They had lost the First World War, that was not good. There were many
 hardened men left, for they had been in the trenches, and shot
 and fought under truly ghastly conditions for years.
 So there were a lot of damaged men.
 And then their whole economy collapsed, because they were forced into one,
 what historians see as a very punitive, peace treaty to sign. Everything fell apart
 in a way that we cannot imagine.
 In the 1930s, the Germans started to get up, and then Hitler
 came to power, he began not only to re-arm but also to re-industrialize the economy.
 And he did that well.
 Hitler was a good orator, although he was not a coherent one
 philosophical theorist. But seeing him as silly is completely wrong.

 He certainly wasn't stupid.
 I wouldn't say he was very well educated, but he had developed a lot
 sense of aesthetics. And he spent a lot of time designing the cities he would build
 when the war was over.
 And he designed those cities as places where art, or at least the Nazi version of art, would flourish.
 There is no evidence that what was wrong with the Nazis was a lack of civilization.
 In fact, there is more evidence that they were, I think, too civilized.
 I will discuss that later.
 Anyway, you think, "How did Hitler manage to put a spell on all those people?"
 This is a hypothesis based on Jungian thinking.
 I'm letting you know because Jung has been accused of being an anti-Semite.
 There are several reasons for this, partly because of what happened during World War II,
 and partly because his theory borrowed much from Christianity, though
 to other sources. And he believed there were differences in the psychology of people with diabetes
 different ethnic backgrounds.
 Whether that's racist depends on whether or not you like the person you're talking to.

 Because political leftists think that there are cultural differences, and that they are important,
 but if you bring that up in the wrong way, you are a racist.
 And political right-wing people just think there are ethnic differences.
 It's a tricky issue.
 If there are no differences that are important, what about multiculturalism?
 Then it is not worth keeping it.
 If there are differences, you have to deal with the differences,
 so it's never right.
 Regardless, Jung has often been accused of anti-Semitism, in particular
 by biographers who were spiteful, ignorant and historically uninformed, and I would say
 fundamentally malicious.
 He worked as a CIA agent, it was revealed last year.
 For years, he provided the US government with psychological reports on the underlying
 psychological structure of the Nazi leaders.
 He never told anybody about that while alive, it came (as far as I know)
 only came to light last year, or maybe the year before.
 Regardless, the Germans were not happy with the situation
 and they formed great crowds. What happens when people gather
 in a group?
 We talked about it last time, about Kierkegaard's idea that as soon as you
 have a group of people, no matter how sincere they may be as individuals,
 the group is immediately not truthful.
 There are real reasons for that, real psychological reasons.
 There is the famous "Asch experiment," I hope those are the right experiments,
 ASCH, over line length.
 You draw two lines on a board, of the same length, and you conspire with
 the group. You ask a poor victim to play, who does not know about the game.
 And you ask someone and he says, "No, those lines are different in length."
 You ask someone else, "Yes, they are quite different in height."
 And yet another person says, "Yes, I see the height difference."
 And then if you ask the poor victim, "Is there a height difference?" and he says, "Yes."
 You can understand why.
 If all those people say it there'd be something wrong with them all
 which seems unlikely.
 Or he's the victim of a conspiracy, which is a bit paranoid, but in this case
 actually correct.
 Or he just doesn't see it right.
 You can see it as modesty that he thinks he is mistaken.
 The fact that a person goes with the crowd has to do with their ability to
 being social and conforming, which is a huge benefit in many ways.
 Because if you were all anti-social and non-conformist, a lot of you would be in prison,
 and could we not have this pleasant, peaceful conversation.

 You shouldn't underestimate the usefulness of conforming too much.
 There's a funny story I read once, I don't think it's true, but it could be
 in which psychology students gathered and decided to fool their professor.
 He walked back and forth, and the trick was that they didn't mind him
 if he was on the left side of the room, they would talk
 and look up.
 And if he were on the right side of the room, they would pay close attention.
 The story goes that after they practiced the trick for several weeks, they got him to lecture
 right next door.
 He never left that place.
 I am telling that because it is quite clear that people can respond
 on the signals the group gives.
 A good speaker does a number of different things.
 One is that he never speaks to the group.
 You choose some specific individuals and speak to them, they represent group.
 Then you can determine whether everyone understands it, and the other that a good speaker does
 is to pay attention to the reactions of the group.
 If a lecture is actually a dialogue, even if the audience only provides non-verbal ones
 elements of the conversation, those non-verbal elements are important.
 You want to be in contact with non-verbal communication.
 Hitler is a chaotic person.
 He is very angry, partly he is angry because he was a frustrated art student.
 He tried to be admitted to art school four times. So the one who is actually responsible for the Second World War
 was the committee of four, which Hitler refused to enter the Vienna Art Academy.

 He really wanted it and also had some artistic talent.
 It looks like it was a bit conventional, but I have some of them
 seen his sketches, and he was not a complete ignorance.
 He thought it might be good to go to college, because he had just gone through World War I,
 and that was no fun.
 There's a story about Hitler in the trenches, he was there with
 his comrades, and he went out to do something,
 and when he came back they were all dead because a bomb had landed in the middle of the group.
 You would think that would affect your psyche. Because after such an experience
 are you either going to think, "Things are pretty random and awful"
 or: “There is something special about me, because I was not killed by the bomb.
 Maybe God has saved me for a higher purpose. ”
 You can be sure that when you go through such an experience, it will
 such thoughts run through your mind.
 He was awarded a medal for bravery, and after World War I he wandered like
 many unemployed men, like a vagabond.
 He was not very happy about that.
 Not surprisingly, however, he was not admitted to art school.
 He didn't have a fully developed political theory, but he was one
 good speaker, and there were many people who listened to him, because the people tried
 to understand what they could do about all the chaos.
 Well, then you ask yourself, "What was Hitler good at?"
 I am now going to tell a different story, and then come back to this.
 I don't know if you are aware of the daycare scandals that were very common
 in the eighties.
 It was very widespread, occurring in many cities.
 It used to be that someone who was slightly paranoid, or severely paranoid,
 took his children to daycare.
 That was new in the eighties because women started to work en masse.

 They gave their children (under the age of three) to total strangers.
 Some became very concerned about it, as it still is, and sometimes
 that got out of hand. Especially in those with a tendency towards paranoid schizophrenia
 and may have already had seizures.
 The child came home and the mother saw something special, or not,
 to his behavior and started fantasizing about what it could be.
 Then she started to ask the child if it had been touched in a certain way.
 She continued to do so for a while.
 Soon the child began to have nightmares, and the child told
 the mother what the nightmares were that upset her and started to ask even more penetrating questions.
 And soon told her children that horrific things happened to them at the daycare.

 She then went to the police, who did not review her psychiatric background.
 The police went to question other children, and if they did it correctly,
 the other children also began to develop stories.
 How did that come about?
 In a number of ways.
 First, the police asked suggestive questions such as, "Did someone touch you?"
 Of course someone had touched the children, people are touching children.
 "Did someone touch you there?"
 That's not a question, that's information.
 It means that if someone touched me there, an adult there will hurt
 is interested in.
 What does a child do when they answer the questions an adult?
 What do they know?
 They are three years old.
 They can barely organize their story.
 If you talk to a child and you want them to give you a report of their day,
 you have to lead them to organize their memories, and what they do in part
 if you do, look at you to see if
 they tell you the good things. What should be, because
 they try to tell people things in a way that is understandable.
 This makes the child very receptive to non-verbal and verbal signals from the adult.
 Think about how quickly those little preschoolers try to learn the language.
 That goes very fast and nobody actually teaches them. They are just paying attention
 like a maniac.
 You have some police officers on an adventure who think there is a sexual habitual
 filthy in their midst.
 They interview fifteen to twenty children, they do that with dolls, and very often.

 And sooner or later all the kids start having nightmares, and they start the police
 telling terrible things. Like they were taken to a basement room
 where they were undressed and forced to play “leapfrog”.
 It is unbelievable.
 It is all recorded in a book entitled "Satan's Silence," which was written by a social worker
 and a lawyer.
 It's unimaginable.
 The longest prison sentences in America's history were imposed on a number of women
 middle-aged caring for small children.
 The FBI even invented a new criminal category: "Late Onset Female Sexual Offender."
 Why didn't that category exist before?
 Simply because there are no late-onset female sex offenders.
 That's why we didn't need that category.
 When all those accusations came out, it took a category for those women.
 Some were sentenced to 350 years in prison, which seemed somewhat unnecessary, given that they are still only
 would live about forty years.
 They were sentenced to life twelve times.
 There was even a situation where a city went so far as to start digging around
 to find those underground satanic hideouts where all those strange rituals would take place.

 There was no concrete evidence.
 The final conclusion, and this touched thousands of people ...
 The final conclusion was that there is no one who satanically tortures children
 in daycare.
 Why am I telling you this?
 What the kids did, if you think about it, how did they come
 to those strange ideas?
 You have to know that kids aren't stupid, and they can get over terrible
 things dream.
 They have an imagination capable of reaching for the terrible.
 Everyone knows that. Because you just have to think about how you, as a child
 hid under the covers because there were horrible things in your dark room.
 You could easily fill the darkness with monsters, and it should be,
 because there are monsters in the dark.
 Even if your parents may not say so.
 There may not be monsters in that particular patch of darkness, and it's very reasonable
 to tell your kids that.
 But in the darkness as a whole, that's a whole different story.
 Children are not stupid.
 The adults begin to question them, and the back part of the child's brain, the imagination,
 starts to think, "What do these people want?"
 They give a little information, and the adults respond,
 and will focus on that information.
 Maybe it's a police officer who hates Satanist kidnappers, what a fair thing
 position is.
 So if the child provides information about the existence of such a thing, the police officer will respond,
 and the child will think, “Okay, so what's going on has something to do with that…” They don't consciously think that,
 but their imaginations work.
 "How do I shape the reality that is presented to me?"
 And then the dreams appear.
 By speaking correctly, you can make all kinds of things come up
 in the unconscious minds of your listeners.
 And by looking at them, you can make out their unconscious desires.
 Now I speak to you all, and you are frustrated because your life is
 was terrible for about fifteen years.
 I say this and that, and then I say something disapproving of Jews.
 You are all angry, and there are two or three people who say "Yes!" call.
 I think, "That's an interesting response," and then I submit some more ideas
 without getting a response, and to other ideas people react vividly.
 And I'm not stupid trying to get the attention of the crowd.
 And if I do that fifty times, the crowd will tell me a lot
 about what she wants. Especially if I am willing to go along with it.
 I can do that easily, especially when I start to influence the crowd
 because I can use their emotions and the expression of that emotion, and I can learn
 to play that. And then that turns into a process of positive feedback.
 So Hitler informs the public, and the public informs Hitler,
 and that is why Jung believed that Hitler embodied the "shadow" of the German people.
 That's another reason you have to be careful what you say, why you say it,
 why you demand attention, and all that sort of thing. And what you actually do
 motivates, and what the actual motivations are of the people who listen to you,
 because who knows where you will end up if you are not careful?
 In fact, we know where you end up if you're not careful, and that's not pretty.
 That's for sure.
 And think we've learned something from that… No, we haven't.
 We have not learned anything from it.
 We don't want to understand.
 These men were very concerned with that.

 Binswanger and Boss had both been influenced by Freud and Jung.
 You can see them on the bottom right, that's Boss with Jung, and that is
 Binswanger on the left, and Boss above.
 They look like thoughtful people and were pretty smart,
 and they were highly philosophical, they had both studied Heidegger and Husserl,
 German philosophers.
 Heidegger got caught up in Nazism, and his philosophy is
 viewed with suspicion (perhaps rightly so)
 as a result of his collaboration with the Nazis.
 So it wasn't just stupid people who got involved.
 About everyone got into it.
 One of the things to think about is if you were there
 each of you had a ninety percent chance that it had happened to you.
 You wouldn't have been a person who saved gypsies, forget it.
 Unless you think you are extremely heroic, and I would be very reluctant
 assuming that, you may assume that you are
 the crowd had come along, just like everyone else, because it happened to everyone.
 What these men were trying to figure out was ... there were two things.
 There was the function and structure of belief systems, and then the nature of them
 that which transcends the belief system.
 What transcends the belief system is what you don't know when you use that belief system,
 because there are things outside your belief system that have their own nature.
 Usually when you make a mistake you run into those things, and the things
 do not go as you expect or would like.
 And the other problem you are trying to solve is what is the correct behavioral form
 for an individual in relation to belief systems and the world
 that transcends belief systems?
 The reason they were interested in that is because they thought:
 "Maybe it would be good if our belief systems didn't become so severely pathological."
 Because when that happens, six million people will end up in ovens, and more than 120 million die
 people on the battlefield.
 That is without counting the mass murders of Stalin, or Mao, next to whom Hitler in a sense
 seemed an amateur.
 Stalin left six million people to starve in Ukraine in the 1930s,
 and that was just the beginning.
 How many of you have heard about the Ukrainian famine?
 How many not?
 Think about that, how many of you knew that Mao killed a hundred million people?
 How many not?
 Think about why you don't know.
 You know the Nazis, but you don't know the horrors of the communists
 have caused.
 It's worth asking yourself, "Why?" Because the communists, especially the Maoists,
 were very cruel.
 It is very important, of all the things you can learn psychologically
 of the twentieth century. That's where these 1950s figures
 focused on.
 Things can go seriously wrong, it was a big shock to everyone.
 Because everyone was excited when in the early nineteenth century religion,
 traditional religious beliefs perished.
 The Marxists said religion was there to oppress the poor,
 and to maintain the priests and aristocracy. No doubt you learn a lot from that
 type of thinking in the lessons, based on power and economics.
 That is typical of intellectually manipulative political leftist thinkers.
 In fact, that's their routine.
 They reduce everything to one drive, and usually it's economy or power, then
 they explain everything from that perspective.
 It is so shortsighted it should be banned.
 The Marxists were happy that the religion had collapsed, because they thought so
 a great form of oppression disappeared.
 And that is understandable, it was not that the Catholic Church was free from corruption.
 In many ways it was a corrupt business, and you can think of it as merely a corrupt business.
 "Get rid of it, it is good that it disappears."
 And Freudians thought the same, as did most intellectuals.
 Freud thought religion was nothing more than a childish delusion with which people identified
 because they were afraid of death.
 It was a defense against agony.
 The Marxist and Freudian arguments are very strong,
 because you can observe it: people use their religious beliefs as a defense against things
 what they are afraid to confront?
 Certainly.
 Does the church oppress people, has it conspired with those in power for centuries?

 Certainly.
 The question is: what do you conclude from that?
 You partly gather that all kinds of structures do that. That's how structures work.
 You can't judge one structure and think the other will ...
 As the political right always talks about big governments, how terrible that is,
 and the political left always talks about how terrible big companies are.
 Big is terrible, it doesn't matter whether it's government or companies,
 for things tend to corrupt over time, and this should be taken into account.
 The Freudians and the intellectuals and the Marxists were quite happy
 that the religious dream began to disappear. They believed the new constructs
 that they would build, fascist and communist, would be so much better than the previous one,
 that everyone would live in a utopian world.
 It is a pity that nothing came of it, but it certainly did not happen.

 What happened was… Sometimes when you break something off, even when you think so
 it is terrible, you end up building something on its ruins, making the previous terrible
 layman's work, and that is certainly what happened in the twentieth century.

 Whatever you say about the Catholic Church and its barbarity,
 especially during the witch hunts in the Middle Ages ...
 Those people were amateurs compared to the fascists and the communists.
 You count their victim numbers in tens of thousands, not hundreds of millions.
 Either way, it didn't go very well.
 And in the 1950s ... especially since the Cold War started when World War II ended,
 and it ended with an atomic bomb on Japan. And the Russians had the atomic bomb a little while later,
 and both the Americans and the Russians had the hydrogen bomb
 early 1950s.
 I don't know if you know this: do you know that a hydrogen bomb has an atomic bomb for ignition?

 So the atomic bomb is proportional to a hydrogen bomb
 as the spark in relation to the bushwort.
 The detonation of the atomic bomb is only there to start the explosion.
 So hydrogen bombs are much more destructive than nuclear bombs.
 In the mid-1950s, we put ourselves in the position where
 huge bombs were made, incredibly large bombs.
 Four hundred times stronger than the bomb that destroyed Hiroshima.
 Huge bombs, and they got pretty good at it.
 In the mid-1950s, we had plenty of firepower on both sides of the Atlantic,
 and the missiles to deliver it, which the Nazis had actually developed
 during the Second World War.
 They were all Nazi scientists developing missiles, and they were all taken by the Americans
 after World War II, to work on the US space program.
 And in the 1950s, we also had the missiles to fire those things.
 The psychologists who thought about what was in the
 World War II had happened, were upset by that, and rightly so, and then the horrors set in
 of Stalinism.
 Although it took the Western intellectuals about thirty years before they could muster any recognition for it.

 I think Jean-Paul Sartre was a member of the Communist Party until 1970.
 It was very common, especially among French intellectuals, although the news was getting out.

 Good observers like George Orwell had already noticed in the late 1930s
 that Stalin's paradise was not what it seemed.
 People thought he was the political right and didn't listen to him much,
 when he was actually the political left.
 These existential phenomenologists are trying to find out:
 we have a big problem here, the belief systems are seriously going in the wrong direction.
 There is an indication that there is some individual responsibility,
 whose nature is not clear.
 If you live in a country where everyone has turned into a fascist killer, is that your fault?

 It is not clear that an individual should be held responsible for the actions
 of an entire country. But the country is made up of individuals, so that
 is a complicated problem.
 One of the tendencies of Western law is that you do not hold an individual responsible
 for the actions of the group, even if he or she happens to be there
 part of it.
 But you can't ignore the fact that all those things were people.
 Then you cannot ignore the fact that it was individuals who did the terrible things
 those people were affected.
 In Auschwitz, for example, one of the guards' tricks was ...
 they took the Jews out of the carriage, many had died in the carriage,
 because they had so little space, so many suffocated. Whether the elderly died,
 or the children died, and that was fine.
 On the outside of the car, especially when it was winter, twenty degrees below zero,
 people would freeze, but you had to get rid of that anyway,
 so that was handy.
 Then you took them to Auschwitz, where they all came out, speaking different languages,
 without family, it couldn't be more miserable.
 One trick was to get someone who wasn't broken enough to lift a big bag of wet salt,
 about forty-five kilos. And have it carried from one side of the site to the other, and then back again.

 Up and down.
 You shouldn't see those camps as a football field.
 They were entire cities.
 They were big, they contained tens of thousands of people. And there is some guard
 who likes that joke.
 It's not just a few people who are like that.
 We found out with the "Stanford Prison Experiment," what every psychologist
 as immoral because we actually discovered something with it, that if you are normal people
 gives the chance to be fascist barbarians, thirty percent of the people will within six days.
 What we learned was that social psychologists should not organize a Stanford Prison Experiment.
 That is the wrong conclusion.
 These phenomenologists were all concerned about this, thinking:
 "What can we do about it?"
 They begin to think about how belief systems are constructed.
 Their first thesis is that we are the reality we are dealing with
 as psychologists ... we must treat human experience as that reality.
 The reality for you, from a phenomenological perspective, is all that you experience
 is real. And they also assume that it is not possible for anything to be more real than that.
 Your consciousness, whatever it may be, is real, and your dreams are real, and your emotions are real,
 and your pain is real. Which is very helpful if you want to be sure
 that you won't hurt people.
 You have to think that maybe pain should be approached as a fundamental reality,
 rather than as an epiphenomena of a material substance.
 That is their primary perspective.
 They took that over from Heidegger. Because Heidegger thought that Western philosophy had gone in the wrong direction,
 three thousand years ago, because we didn't focus on being as such
 as the basic mystery.
 The basic mystery is: why is there anything at all?
 And since there is something, an experience of being, what are the fundamental elements of it?
 That's the phenomenological perspective, it's not the same as a scientific approach,
 because it starts with a different starting point.
 The scientific premise is that the objectively real elements of things
 are the most real elements.
 There is no point in complaining about that because it is an approach that is very good
 works for many things, for example making hydrogen bombs.
 But it is also reasonable to think it may not be the whole truth,
 and nothing but that.
 You may also suspect the fact that we can make hydrogen bombs
 indicates that there is something wrong with our basic belief systems.
 Even though they are scientific.
 That was something Heidegger was working on, even though he got involved
 with the Nazis.
 The phenomenologists tried to analyze experience as such. They formulated
 some hypotheses, and made some observations.
 The first is, we assume that your experience, that experience as such, is real.

 That dreams are real, and pain is real, and objects that we can all perceive
 being genuine doesn't mean they all belong in the same category.
 My dreams don't belong in the same category as this table, because you have
 no access to my dreams, you can access the table.
 But that doesn't mean my dreams, my pain, and my feelings aren't real.
 They are real.
 That's the first, and notice that this is an assumption.
 What they say is, “Let's pretend that is the case, and work from those assumptions,
 and see what happens, see where we end up. ”
 That's a perfectly reasonable way of working, because underneath every theory always lies
 an assumption.
 Otherwise, your theory would be one hundred percent correct and cover everything.
 And that's not the case, so you have to make an assumption somewhere at the beginning
 and say, "We're not going to question that, that's the starting point."
 You have to, because you don't know everything, you don't have a complete theory.
 The phenomenologists don't like the idea that mind can be reduced to matter,
 they don't play that game.
 They are not playing the game that the subject is just an epiphenomena, and that the object is real.
 They don't play that game either.
 That's partly because, as Boss says, “Without a subject, there would be nothing to confront
 to enter into objects and perceive them as such.
 That implies that every object, everything that is objective, is objective only because it is
 objectified by the subject, and thus the most subjective is what there is. ”
 That's a radical statement, but think about this: when I look at the can of Coke,
 can you say I see the object, then format how I could use it,
 evaluate it, then use.
 In fact, that's not what you do.
 In fact, it is not at all obvious that you perceive objects.
 If you think about it, people didn't see scientific objects until about 1500, 1450 AD.

 Before that, there was no "objective object."
 What we saw did not take that for granted, because then we would be direct
 scientists have been.
 George Kelly claimed that humans were scientists by nature, that we are always researching hypotheses
 and trying to refute and things like that.
 That is an interesting theory, and in a way it is correct, but fundamentally it is incorrect.
 We are not scientists by nature, we are engineers by nature.
 When we look at the world, we don't see objects and then make out their uses,
 what we are actually seeing is usage.
 For example, when I look at that Coke can, my visual system instantly activates my motor cortex.

 I can even do that without consciously seeing the can, to a certain extent.
 There are people with blind vision, I told you about that. They say
 they can't see, but if you ask which hand is holding you up, they can tell you.
 They may not be able to see, but they can see patterns from their visual system
 through their motor cortex.
 That's essentially how we interact with the world, according to Piaget.
 We are physical beings, so what we see when we look around are not objects,
 they are things we can use and things that get in the way.
 That's a theory by JJ Gibson,
 who wrote a great book about it entitled "The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception."
 His research was a form of pragmatism.
 Pragmatists argue that things, including theories and observations, have a limited scope
 of truth. And the limited scope of truth is determined by the relationship between your actions
 and the results.
 So I think this is a Coke can.
 Is that what it is?
 No, but that's good enough for me if I want to drink some Coke from it.
 God knows what it could be.
 If you go to communist China, and you start promoting these things, what is it?
 This thing tells a story, what's the story?
 Do you really need Coca Cola?
 No.
 It's frills, unnecessary luxury.
 It's not even good for you, but it's buzzing and it's sweet
 and you can buy it.
 Why?
 No matter how silly you are in your food choices, as far as our society is concerned
 you have the right to poison yourself in whatever way you think suits you best.
 So when you send this Coke can to communist China, this thing screams:
 "Silly individuality."
 And who knows how it undermines the state.
 And if you don't think about that, you don't think.
 Think what happens when we export cars.
 What does a car say?
 He says: “You can go wherever you want,
 (that is nobody's business) in a dangerous, fast way. ”
 If you wanna make a political statement, pack that thing and send it,
 and everyone will say, "I would really like to have a thing like that."
 And “poof,” that's how communism disappears.
 Nothing is a better expression of individuality and capitalism than a private car.
 You can even pollute the atmosphere and ruin the planet,
 but you have to go to the shop around the corner by car to get your coke,
 so get rid of that atmosphere.
 So don't think what you see are just objects
 because they are not.
 I thought about this when I thought about people going to Graceland
 to see Elvis's guitar.
 What exactly is it that makes a guitar Elvis' guitar?
 It's not actually the guitar, because it's just there like any guitar.

 You could take out that guitar and put in another guitar that's the same, and it still would
 be Elvis' guitar, because nobody would know.
 You may think that's not Elvis's real guitar.
 That's funny because you only think so when you think Elvis's guitar
 that material thing is what you look at.
 But that's not it.
 That's just part of it.
 That thing is part of a very layered reality.
 The people who want to watch that look at it because of
 the magic it radiates, but that magic is real.
 The magic is the effect of that guitar on the whole culture.
 And those effects are also the guitar.
 It's strange because when you go to look at Elvis' guitar, you don't look at it
 the guitar, but you watch the magic.
 And strangely, the magic is real.
 You cannot think like that if you are a materialist, because then you think so
 the thing is the material. Go away.
 I can tell you a different story. When the Europeans went to the South Pacific Islands,
 had the original inhabitants, because they were few,
 not a technologically developed society.
 So if you were John, a dominant guy, in the culture of the Pacific Islands,
 maybe you had a stone ax, a solid stone ax.
 Go make an ax out of stone and see how long that takes, it's quite a bit of work.
 So if you have a high status, if you've worked your whole life to be on top of it
 To get to the pyramid, you may have two axes. Then you are lucky.
 You have two axes, which is more than any other animal, much more.
 That is not trivial.
 Then the missionaries come, open a shop, and what do they bring?
 Steel axes.
 That's a setback, you've worked your whole life for stone axes,
 making you head of the tribe. And then your child goes to the local missionaries,
 and they say, "We have a steel ax left, take it home."
 And it's so shocking, because not only did the missionaries have something that was much better
 than the stone ax, it's like an airplane compared to a cart,
 the difference is very big ...
 But the missionaries don't even notice, that's the terrible thing about it.
 They are giving away something that is about immeasurably valuable, because, “It's good,
 we have some of them in storage, we just give some away. ”
 That demoralizes a lot.
 It was demoralizing for the original inhabitants.
 Was it an ax that the missionaries gave away?
 No.
 That's what you think when you're a westerner with a bunch of axes, you think, "Yes, that's an ax."

 It's much more than an ax, much more.
 It is a weapon that can bring down an entire culture by accident.
 One of the things that the phenomenologists made, this is an interesting statement. I did not know
 that they claimed so.
 It took me a long time to think this through because I thought I figured it out myself
 but it turns out that it is very difficult to discover anything for yourself.
 When I examined how the brain works from a neuropsychological perspective,
 informed in large part by Jeffrey Gray (which we'll talk about later),
 I noticed that you don't actually see things when you see something for the first time.

 When you see something for the first time, you don't actually see it, you react to it.
 You respond to it with your body.
 I can give you an example.
 You have a partner and a loyal relationship, but then you discover,
 he tells you or you find out on his phone that he
 having an affair.
 You look at him and you think, "What do you see?" You think, "You see the person."
 No, you don't see the person, that's incorrect.
 What you see is a big hole that you are going to fall into, and you don't know
 that you see it, but your body knows. Your blood pressure rises
 and your heart rate starts to speed up and you sweat.
 And the reason is that your body can see what you cannot see, and what it sees is something
 what it cannot understand. It don't understand.
 It sees the terrain behind the map. Because when I look at you, I actually see
 my assumptions about you, and because you are polite and well behaved,
 are you kind enough to behave in accordance with those assumptions,
 so I don't actually have to look at you. And thank you very much for that.
 For it is very difficult to look at people because they are terrifying and profound creatures.
 And so everyone behaves so that we don't constantly scare each other.

 If someone betrays you, then “poof,” the assumptions are gone.
 Okay, what's up there?
 God knows.
 And that's what your body responds to.
 And that's partly why the phenomenologists say we respond to meaning first, we don't respond
 on objects.
 It takes a long time to see an object.
 For example, let's say this person betrayed you.
 You thought you knew who he was, and you thought you knew who you were.
 You were wrong.
 You don't know who he is, and being so stupid it means that
 you don't know who you are. And that you can't trust your memories with that person, and maybe none at all
 memory of your intimate relationships.
 And what about the future?
 So when you look at that person, what do you see?
 You see all of this as chaos.
 You can see that.
 And that chaos is the meaning behind your assumptions, and that's why the phenomenologists
 would say, "Meaning appears."
 And that's what we encounter in the first place.
 That's intelligent.
 And do you know what's really strange?
 That's how your brain works.
 And that's strange because you ... think about it: how do you define reality?
 That's difficult.
 I think most of you would define reality like Isaac Newton.
 Or perhaps like Democritus, the first person to formulate the hypothesis of atoms.
 In a Newtonian world everything consists of billiard balls.
 They collide in a causal way and you can predict the consequences.
 And if you take that far enough, you can make an entirely deterministic world appear.

 A causes B, B causes C, always the same way, and everything is like a giant clock.

 That's Newton's model.
 And it was a clock model because at that time clocks very much
 were impressive.
 Clocks contributed a lot to the industrial revolution, and to medieval cities
 put a lot of time and effort into their clocks. They loved those things.

 They could keep track of how the planets moved.
 The clock is very important, and when you think about an invention that changed the world,
 the clock is an example of this.
 Now we can measure time.
 Everyone can measure time in the same way.
 This is important. So the idea that the universe is like a clock, since the clock
 predicting the universe is a very powerful idea.
 It turns out to be wrong, because causality is a mess. Nobody really understands
 and there are levels of analysis where causality, as we experience it,
 does not seem to apply.
 When you go to the subatomic level, there is a probability calculation. You can't
 predict specific cases, and I don't think you can predict the future.
 You can partially predict the future in a very limited way, for some purposes,
 in a certain time span, and you can't even predict how long that time span will last.

 Some things seem to be more stable, in more situations, and for longer periods than others,
 but there is still… there is instability everywhere.
 It makes forecasting very difficult.
 So that's one idea about reality, that's the idea you have.
 That is the reality you received from your education.
 The idea of ​​reality that you have received from your education.
 Even though we know it's wrong. Einstein ended that world at the beginning of the nineteenth century,
 along with the various people Einstein worked with.
 That is gone, it is incorrect, and there are all kinds of things
 very complex problems, such as how to model positive feedback processes. This puts you in chaos theory.
 It is very difficult to model positive feedback processes.
 They can get out of hand in fifty different ways, and you cannot predict them properly because they are dependent
 of the original circumstances, et cetera.
 So the deterministic world is incorrect.
 In part, I think we must have free will because we cannot act deterministically.
 A deterministic system only works in a system that remains the same.
 You can wind a clock, like those wind-up toys that can walk.
 But if you put them in front of an abyss, they just keep going.
 So when chasms are constantly appearing randomly before us, I don't see
 how a deterministic system could guide us.
 That implies that our knowledge, the knowledge we derive from the past,
 sufficiently accurate to lead us causally to the future.
 That's not right, it doesn't work that way, maybe that's why we have consciousness.
 Nobody knows, but that's a good theory, if there is a reason.
 Anyway, now an alternative, a Darwinian alternative. The alternative is
 that the world is a complex and dynamic place.
 There are all kinds of strange things.
 In essence it consists of patterns and patterns and patterns, that's what it is,
 and they shift and dance around.
 Then you throw something living in it.
 It is programmed by DNA and has to keep up with the patterns that are constantly changing.

 Some are somewhat stable, but they are quite fluid.
 Then you put the DNA in there and that produces a million variants of whatever it may produce.

 Most are incorrect.
 You are a mosquito and you lay a million eggs.
 That's a million guesses as to how the future will be causally. The guess is
 that the future will unfold so that this egg can become a mosquito.
 Then you ask the question: "How often is the mosquito that lays the eggs wrong?"
 The answer is that if he lays a million eggs in his lifetime, I don't know how many eggs
 mosquitoes lay but there are many, all those eggs will die except one.
 If the mosquito is lucky.
 You know that because we're not up to our knees in mosquitoes.
 If it weren't, there would be mosquitoes everywhere, but luckily there aren't.
 So what's the guess?
 The guess is that mosquitoes will blend in with their environment.
 Answer: Incorrect, with the exception of one in a million times.
 How do you deal with that?
 Millions of mosquitoes and millions of eggs make it work.
 It means the basic hypothesis that the structure of the mosquito corresponds to the structure
 of reality is 999,999 out of a million times incorrect.
 You may think that is completely false, but it is enough to keep the mosquitoes alive.
 This is continued over time, and what is actually being continued is
 a massive amount of deaths.
 Almost everything fails, 99.9 percent of the species that once lived there are extinct.
 We ensure that a significant portion of the species that now exist
 will die out.
 Failure and death are the norm, and it will affect you all.
 So if the underlying structure of reality is changeable, which it is. and the only way
 what you can adapt to is generating variation of which most of it decays,
 except those who can keep up with it more or less by accident, how do you define what is real?
 A Darwinist would say, as would a pragmatist: you embody the real as best you can.

 That is not very good.
 Your reality is good enough for about eighty years.
 And they also say it doesn't get any more real than that.
 Reality is so complicated, a layered spectrum of patterns, that you cannot model
 without death as the mechanism.
 You are incapable of it, and even if you use death, it is almost just dying.
 Even for the parts that are not just dying, which is a very small part, is the solution
 not very good.
 After eighty years you are gone, while there are three billion years of attempts
 behind you. And that is the best you can do.
 Maybe as a parrot you can live to be 150, and there seems to be an immortal jellyfish.
 Typical that those damn jellyfish would be immortal.
 So there is a completely different way of thinking about the real.
 Nietzsche said, "Truth serves life," that is a Darwinian idea.
 Although he did not take it from Darwin, there is nothing more truthful than
 which evolution reveals as the concept for reality.
 It doesn't get any more real than that for us.
 That is not a Newtonian reality.
 It is a multi-dimensional, patterned, chaotic reality that we try to keep up with.
 What that could mean is that the implications for action that I derive from that phenomenon,
 better indicate what it is than an objective analysis. Because your truth
 the degree to which you embody truth becomes according to a Darwinian frame of mind
 entirely determined by your success in life and reproduction.
 That's it, and there's nothing under it.
 Maybe so, but if you're a Darwinian, that's it.
 All in all, I think Darwin is right and Newton is not. We also know
 that Newton is wrong.
 Darwinian thinking is more complicated than we thought because you know what epigenetics is?

 How many of you know that?
 That's pretty good, so your biological education is superseding your historical education.
 How many people don't know what epigenetics is?
 That doesn't matter, as it is relatively new.
 It turns out that your parents' experiences can change their genetic structure,
 in such a way that it changes your genetic structure.
 That is something we did not expect, that much is certain.
 Nobody knows what the ultimate consequences will be, but it seems
 that the evolutionary narrative is more than random production and natural selection.
 There's more than that, and who knows how much.
 So when the phenomenologists say that we respond to meaning first, that begs the question:
 "Is the meaning real?"
 And that raises another question, namely, "What do you mean by really?"
 and that raises another question: "Newtonian real or Darwinian real?"
 Newton is not right, so Darwin and Darwinian really are left, more real than that
 it will not be.
 If a limited entity tries to conceptualize a complex totality, it will never be able to
 embody more than a limited representation thereof. And that won't be very good
 but the best it can be, and it will not be more true than that.
 The phenomenologists have this strange idea that we perceive meaning.
 And that's how your brain functions.
 You first perceive meaning, and then you change it with a lot of work into the perception of an object.

 Who knows how much exploration you have to do before you are able to do so.
 How long do you think it takes a child to learn how to handle their pacifier before giving birth
 build accurate representation of the teat?
 He'll chew it like crazy, take it out of his mouth, look at it, turn it over,
 and hit things.
 He has to do all that, including the physical interaction.
 Experimenting with the thing in different situations creates "object permanence."
 He has to do all that before he can see the thing.
 Early artificial intelligence researchers, who were under the influence of the behaviorists, said the object
 a given, and that they could treat the brain as if it didn't exist.
 The object is just there and you can see the world.
 That turned out to be very incorrect.
 It is difficult to make a computer see the world.
 It turns out that you have to put them in bodies before they can.
 Because you cannot perceive the world without a body.
 Perception is for physical action.
 Without the framework within which ... it is in fact a Piagetian idea.
 This is a pattern, this thing, and the pattern exist at different levels, including the level of advertising,
 your memories of Coke, and all the “jingles” (commercials) you know.
 But this, when I look at that, the pattern comes to my retina, and the pattern is a pattern
 because it is permanent over time.
 It's not like smoke disappearing.
 It stays here over time.
 That comes on my retina, and my retina maps it on my hand.
 That's the Coke can.
 The Coke can is all of this.
 You could say, "That's not what it is, because it's made of aluminum."
 Yes, yes, it is made of aluminum, but that's just one aspect of what it is,
 and it is not necessarily the most important aspect.

 Because it could also be made of plastic
 and what difference would that make?
 It's strange when you think about it.
 People argue that meaning is an epiphenomenon, as if there is no real meaning, and the universe
 would be some kind of dead thing. And if we all died out tomorrow, there would be nothing but a collection of meaningless marbles
 that would move in space.
 First of all, even this isn't true, who knows what would be if nothing was around
 to perceive it.
 The physicists say we should see it more as a gigantic potentially fluctuating quantum field,
 that might not even turn into stars and planets until someone is there to see it.
 You might think that's ridiculous, but if you think about it for a moment, you'll see
 that there is something in it.
 You are the one who specifies the level of analysis.
 The way you look at the world, you don't see atoms, you don't see subatomic
 particles, and you don't see small stones.
 You see things the size of a planet when you look into space, and you see it
 at some point in time.
 Maybe your refresh rate is about sixty hertz, so what you're seeing is the universe
 divided into sixty hertz layers. And you think that's real.
 But so is the rest, also the great expanding time, from the beginning to the end.
 You don't see all that, but it is there.
 All those things are there at the same time.
 What is the whole?
 The physicists seem to tell us that it is a set of quantum potential,
 which is only realized until there is something about consciousness that interacts with it.
 A lot of meaning appears, and children are
 so fascinating, because meaning appears very visibly to them.
 That's why they always walk around like this.
 It's a lot of fun to watch children because they bring you back in touch with that feeling.
 Children have to pay you so that you don't throw them out the window.
 They are very annoying, they always cry, they are completely useless,
 they just lie there and do nothing, and they wake you up at three in the morning
 to taunt you.
 Since you are selfish and mean, you need something in return.
 So they smile at you.
 But they also do other things.
 They're really comical so it's a lot of fun to watch and play with them.
 But one of the things they really do when they're with you is remove your blinders.

 You go into the woods with a two and a half child, which is very annoying.
 It just randomly wanders.
 You have no goal.
 Nothing purposeful is going to happen to a two and a half child, but
 it does have something, because it frees your mind from purposeful limitation.
 You can see how a two and a half child looks at all those things where you
 haven't looked at it in twenty years because you've looked at it before and are now using your memory.

 Then you think, "Wow, that's really cool."
 They bring you something, and they tell you it's cool.
 Maybe it's a shimmering piece of aluminum from chewing gum paper.
 You think it is a chew paper because that is what you see when you look at it.
 You have already built up a representation of a chewing gum paper, and you just put that on it.
 That is not what the child sees.
 Who knows what they see.
 Maybe how the light is reflected by the aluminum like a prism, and how it shimmers.
 Or how cool it is that it can be folded, and how light it is.
 They look at it like that, and I think that's because
 their cortex is not yet very developed. They haven't built the restrictive structures yet
 that prevent them from seeing meaning appear.
 You may think, "Is there evidence for that?"
 In fact, there is quite a bit of evidence for that.
 One piece of evidence is that if you remove a cat's brain,
 leaving behind only the hypothalamus and spinal cord, becoming “hyper-exploratory”. She walks around
 like everything is interesting.
 That's strange behavior for something without a brain.
 You would think that if you run out of brains, nothing would be interesting.
 It depends on how much of your brain you have.
 There are people who have experienced that.
 There was a famous case of a conductor who suffered severe brain damage.
 His hypocampus was more or less broken, causing him to lose information from his short-term memory to his
 long-term memory.
 He wrote articles, very extensive diary reports.
 He kept writing, "It's like seeing everything for the first time."

 He walked around in a constant state of wonder.
 His wife came to visit him.
 He couldn't remember anything that had happened.
 He was shocked to see her because he didn't see his memories.
 He said, "It's like seeing you for the first time."
 And it was, he saw her for the first time.
 Access to the restrictive structures that used to direct his attention was gone.
 It was an interesting case because now and then he played the piano.
 He had an epileptic fit and then he could play like he used to play.
 It was as if he had to switch brain modes and the switching mechanism was damaged.
 He had to get a little attack and then he could play Beethoven sonatas like crazy.

 Then he had a minor seizure and came back:
 "As if I see everything for the first time."
 I think psychedelics were so attractive to people in the 1960s,
 and for people since the beginning of time, because in a sense they take care of that.

 Suddenly the representations of your memory are gone.
 What do you see then?
 God knows, but it's not what you expect.
 And maybe that's what's there, but maybe that's not.
 I'm going to summarize this.
 What do you think drives people to extreme forms of pathology?
 That could be your pathology: your misery, your suffering, and all that.
 Or it could be your social psychopathology, your murderous desire to destroy.
 Now a phenomenological theory.
 The “terror management” theory is that you have to build these structures in your head
 to protect yourself from agony. So what the terror management theorists are basically saying is that
 the more blind you are, the better off you are.
 That is also what the “positive illusion” thinkers think.
 The phenomenologists approached this in a different way.
 They said the meaning that is constantly manifesting is nourishing and revitalizing,
 although it is also so powerful that it can blow you over.
 It's dangerous to mess around with it.
 It's like the burning bush.
 You have to build a structure to deal with it because you have to
 limit it to something you can handle.
 But you have to build this structure correctly and precisely so that the meaning manifests itself
 can be shaped by you into a world, conceptually and practically. Which ensures that
 the remaining meaning can appear in a way that is revitalizing enough,
 so that you don't get corrupted in such a way that you become genocidal.
 That's a good theory, and that's what the phenomenologists were after.
 That's why the existentialists and phenomenologists say:
 “Don't lie to yourself about what is manifesting to you.
 Don't use language instrumentally. ”
 Why?
 Because if you do that and twist the structures you use to interpret the world,
 the world will become twisted for you and what will reveal itself is horror.
 And if nothing but horror appears to you all the time, you will not be okay.
 Because you can't handle such pressure.
 You will become bitter and resentful.
 Everything around you will fall apart because you are not modeling reality
 in a way that positive meaning can appear.
 You will fail and become resentful.
 And you will become bitter.
 Then you will look for someone to hurt, and you will have plenty of justifications there
 have for.
 And worse, and this is a Jungian contribution to this idea: this will not happen all at once,
 it will happen as a consequence of a hundred thousand micro-decisions that you
 hardly notices. Where you can be sincere about something or not, in a miniscule way that seems almost irrelevant.

 But the consequence of doing that for a longer period of time, for example three hundred thousand decisions,
 is that you make yourself a kind of monster that you couldn't face in the mirror.
 And one of the things the phenomenologists would tell you too,
 and Jung also said this is, "You probably are that kind of monster too."
 If you want to deal with that, you have to start taking things seriously.
 There are two things you should take seriously.
 One is the meaning that appears to you, and the other is whether you are sincere
 when you interact with that meaning.
 The ultimate consequence of that is your health, the health of your family
 and your society, the health of the whole society rests on it.
 The way the world develops is the end result of the choices we all make,
 all those little micro-decisions.
 They are like ripples of water in a lake. So if you do something small that isn't right
 what you know you shouldn't do, you are actually distorting the fabric of reality.
 And that's very interesting because we now know what happens when you do that.
 What happens is we end up with the Nazis and the Communists and the hydrogen bombs.
 And we have not yet escaped that.
 Hopefully that will happen, but it won't happen if people don't learn anything from the twentieth century.
