You got to give me about five seconds to get the fight or flight response to process through my body, I can be effective here. So it turns out that I do a pretty good job of being a solvent and being a catalyst. So my intent is, in fact to do that for this group to the extent that I can, and an answer to something that you brought up, which is very important, my commitment is to interact in good face to the best that I do my ability. So that's the front end. So starting off, the title was, I don't know something about complexity, probably a better title be like, I don't know, should is fucked up and stuff. The notion is that we've got a tool kit, it's a legacy tool kit that tool kits sucks, it's broken, it doesn't work very well, we have to free ourselves of that toolkit, because intuitively, whenever we come across a problem, we're going to reach into it and try to solve the problem with that toolkit. So we got to figure out how to break our mind of that and then reconstitute a new toolkit. I'm very interested to find out what it looks like. So think different things very different. Now we've done this before. Fortunately, this is not the first time we been to this rodeo. So I'll take the example of journalism. This is legacy journalism. 
Now, unfortunately, when you go to certain circumstances back in the 2000 timeframe, and everybody talked about reconstituting journalism, they thought that's what reconstituting journalism would look like. Right? Because you take your toolkit, you turn the crank on journalism, I taken your concept, put it on my computer. Yeah. But of course, in fact, we know that that's actually what journalism looks like in the 21st century. you boil it down to the basic function of journalism is the sourcing, the qualification and the dissemination of information into a network that's a journalism is it as a fundamental function? Is it the same category as science, although, of course, different many ways. And then you begin to imagine using your new tool kit, how do you create instruments to affect that particular function? So that's the basic idea of what we have to do in general, with journalism being a case. Great Case in point. Okay, so what is governance if we take that particular mode, right, what are the core functions of this idea of governance, and it's trying to solve a couple of basic fundamental problems that seemed to emerge Any kind of coordination network, the coordination problem, the prisoner's dilemma, collective decision making the tragedy, the commons conflict management, right, it may be bigger or smaller than that the basic idea is, it's some bucket of things that looks like this. 
Now, the legacy toolkit has a pretty solid way of trying to solve these problems. Leviathan, and will be currently living you might call the peak predator of Leviathan space that have been evolving against each other competing a wide variety of different ways, tending unfortunately, on occasion to figure out how to systematically kill each other. And almost all of our toolkit is some modulation on the violence space, call it sovereignty at the top percolating down, hierarchy, bureaucracy, commodification, normalization, etc, etc. 
Okay, then we have to do is we have to do something different. So this is the design constraints on any future instruments in the 21st century. This is by no means comprehensive is probably wrong with the idea to try to start gesturing in the right direction. So, key ideas decentralize If you're building something which requires a transcendent institution to be able to solve those governance problems, you're probably doing something wrong. You have to focus first and foremost, and building something which is decentralized, and uses eminent interlocutory feedback loops to enable the emergence of structure when and if necessary, probably result using different different kinds of currencies, and specifically, some variation on the kinds of reputation currencies that human primate sensors are tuned to be able to react to effectively. Of course, as long as you're building a lot of people, we may be building other kinds of objects. I don't know, in that case, different receivers. Second, there's a phrase architecture is politics, you need to take that actually seriously, a lot of the things that we currently do in institutional form, we will actually need to do in software form. So lots of good reasons software scalable software is portable software is transparent by design. And I mean this very seriously. 
So if you're designing something, think first and foremost, how can I design this as software next fluid and continuous versus silent. We have this weird problem that people right now live in silos, you are a bureaucrat you are at the iftf you are etc, etc, the future is going to be fluid. So figure out how you build something where people can partially attracted something and participate in it, and then jump out of it in different ways. empower individuals, if you're building a machine that works, in spite of incompetent individuals, your fuck because you'll get incompetent individuals scalable across the system. It has to be fault tolerant to incompetent individuals, but fundamentally oriented towards building capable individuals at the edge in all circumstances. Ad Hoc and fine grained polymorphic, solving problems with ad hoc solutions, building architectures as necessary, and then bringing them down and being receptive to the fact you could have a very high degree of fine grained precision and discernment to build them effectively. Right, not grosgrain not coarse grained, but being able to be very nuanced, and last, transparent by design, right, not just transparent in intention, but designed effectively and intelligently to be able to maintain transparency in spite A wide variety of different feedback. We tend to cause to not be transparent based on the way humans tend to interact

