Alright guys, so just a little bit of background as to what this the context of what I'm going to talk about today because I suspect it's not like anything you've seen before or probably not in this context. To first is I actually started my first company in 1998. And then took my last company public in 2007, three different companies. So I had an opportunity to experience the rise of the.com bubble, the decline of the.com bubble, the the death afterwards, the rise, the 2006 frenzy, the financial crisis, all while actually at the helm of a startup company. So the key messages, macro forces can impact your fate, no matter how good you are. So we're gonna talk a little bit about that from the top down. The second is that for some reason, over the past two decades, I seem to have gotten interested in things well in advance of those things becoming interesting to lots of other people. 
It's definitely harkens back to my nerd beginnings, but Also a little bit of a sort of an obsessive effort to understand the sort of the nature of reality at a fundamental level. And then logically, things fall out of that that seem obvious to they'll sort of emerge in reality, and then they do. So I'm gonna try to give you essentially my operating model of what's going on in the world. And for some of you, this may be complete waste of time. And so just try to snore quietly. For others, this may be really awesome. So I'm hoping that those folks get their money's worth.
So we're going to begin with this and foundational assumptions try to sort of get everybody on the same page about the nature of how this sort of big picture thing called the world works. The first is one that I had to deal with a lot in the early part of my career, which is this concept that history happens. I remember being in a meeting with the chairman of EMI us when I was probably about 26. And I tried to explain to him earnestly that the music industry as he knew it was already dead. And the only choice he really had was to figure out what his new model is going to look like. And he Sort of glazed over and had no capacity to consider this, right? It wasn't even necessarily that he didn't want to. But that the idea that the world that he had grown up in could suddenly and abruptly change wasn't part of his operating model. So the key idea here is that history happens, you know, shit falls apart, big time. Absolutely. Anything that currently exists will at some point, no longer exist.
Second, this is the key idea. By the way, if you get this slide to get a lot, it seems to happen all over the place through something called punctuated equilibrium. Right? s curves, we see s curves all the time and economics, computer curves, disruption, waves, things like that. But frankly, we see them all over the place. We see them in the you know, the breaking of dams, the lightning bolt striking. We see them in population growth, you see them all over the place. And the key message of an S curve is this notion of it starts slow. Most people have no idea it's happening at all and frankly, has very little impact on the world. And then it's Some point for some reason, it starts to become more material and starts to accelerate. At this point, it becomes the hot new thing, right? The new revolution, the new way, whatever happens to be around here, it is simply the new thing. 
It's the new standard. It's what happens in over this point, it becomes the model that everybody thinks is the nature of reality and is never going to change again, up here, it's lost, its innovative potential becomes extracted, it just kind of goes along for as long as it's relevant. And typically, by the way, tends to collapse as the next one comes along. Right? So think about these things in terms of waves, if it doesn't seem like anybody really knows about what's going on, but you feel like it's super important. You might be over over here. And then you have to think, okay, where am I on this curve? If you're wavering the left of the curve, you're probably not going to win anytime immediately. Soon. It'll take a while. There's gonna be a lot of forces stacked up against you. So you want to take a strategy that takes that into account. If on the other hand, things feel like they're getting ready to pop, they need position for that as well. Okay. 
Now these waves appear everywhere in society and everywhere it means everywhere, right? So whether you're talking about fashion or education or sexual activity, family technology, finance, money, government, every single aspect of reality and particularly human society perceives by the evolution of lots and lots of different waves that feedback on each other, and the impact each other. Let's take, for example, the rise of the miniskirt. Right? This was a historical event, but it was the combination of let's see what I tracked down I did the research, significant changes in textile manufacturing technology, and economic shift towards the middle class. post war focus on youth and youth culture, the women's movement, changes in media and the emergence of different kinds of new media all happens simultaneously and they'll overlap because this to happen.
And when this happened, it fed back on everything else, right so you get is an extremely complex interference pattern multiple different ways. interacting with each other. Okay, so that's the background. It's a basic ideas and themes and concepts. The key point now is right now several really, really big waves are converging, and they're beginning to become constructive interference right there adding together. I've just got a few here, there's many more, right? And that's the key messages, lots and their big globalization, right, somewhere around 1988 or so the expansion and the inclusion of almost all the world in a single unified system hit and now it's starting to feed back on itself, right? The the novel spaces where nobody goes, and nobody knows what's going on there. They're gone. Right? So we are now post globalization, we're being to see what the world is like in a post global world. post world capitalism and the trend for the West, right? Everybody is in some variation of the post industrial capitalist model, some flavor of it, ecosystem disruption, right. I don't know how much how closely you Those things but pick 15 different ecosystem characteristics, and almost all of them are on the far end of the tipping point on the curve. Population expansion, we're now looking at circumstances where the total number of people on the planet are also way beyond anything that we've ever planned on before. And any system that was designed for a world that had say, 4 billion people in it, which is, you know, before 1960 probably is obsolete right now, because there's just more people that it has to deal with the maturity of a whole variety of different cultural ideas that came out and hit the West in the 1960s. Things like civil rights, the green movement, etc. And then lastly, the sort of stuff that gets talked about a lot here is information technology. And I'll probably focus most on that because that's relevant to a lot of the things that happen entrepreneurially but the key messages, these things all line up. And that means for a very, very big way. And very big waves have very big effects. Right. So the proposition that I'm going to make is that we are already and had been for some time in the middle of a crisis. Truly historical proportions, right? How big? I tend to think we're sort of in 1000 year to 10,000 year equivalent cycle, right? So think about the fall of Rome, right, the complete collapse of Western civilization to the Dark Ages, or maybe the emergence of civilization itself in the Fertile Crescent 10,000, 15,000 years ago. 
That's the level that we got to be thinking about. So if you're thinking about things to happen in sort of 1015 year cycles, that's fine. But just be aware of the fact that the wave may come right value faster than you can imagine. And I don't know where you guys are from I happen to be from Southern California. So surfing waves is one of the things that we do. And it's very fair to say that my primary business activity has been finding waves spotted them and paddling into them. I'm usually very early so other guys end up getting sort of all the all the big wins, but it's kind of fun. All right. So what we're looking at then is a comprehensive, global in scale, civilization level collapse. And what I mean by civilization is civilization is the complete tool. It all the sets of institutions, concepts, processes, models, behaviors that we haven't cultivated ourselves into, to do all the things that we need to do as humans, right, the way we feed ourselves, the way we groom ourselves, when we find mates, all that kind of stuff. And it's comprehensive global all across because everything's now in trained. And they're all been been rendered obsolete, either because the world has changed more rapid than they can handle, or because they themselves have become dysfunctional. I'm not going to go into too much depth on that. And these sorts of things always happen in the same way. Right? They started the week and go towards the center. In this case, they starting at the edge and working towards the core. So briefly, things at the edge, right? 
Remember when journalism was mostly newspapers and television, that's the edge that was a very weak spot in the existing legacy system. And they went digital very quickly. And then journalism largely has already gone through the transition and most journalism now happens in a way that would have made Cronkite have no idea what's going on. Right. Bye. Contrast, hardest things are at the core, these things are going to take longer. And they're the last things to disrupt. And as they disrupt, the consequences are more significant. All right? So one money, right money turns out to have been a fundamental component of the major legacy institutions that are part of our current temporary global civilization and not just a form of money, the institutions around it the way we use it, we use it to decide and make coordinate behavior. And as we know, certainly everybody here knows. So the sign out front, money is now well into the disruptive wave, right? Maybe the early majority level, most people around the world are now beginning to be aware of the fact that money is not magic. It didn't come from God, people make it and people can change it, right. That's a pretty significant psychological change from where it was 20 years ago, governance that I was here, which was why I got invited to this talk, talking about the fact that governance is just really entering into the disruption way. And governance is like how we collectively make decisions about the sorts of things that We do right whether that's in a corporation corporate governance and the way that we make decisions is quite an organizational level or big picture governance like you know, the I will say right now on record that within 50 years, the nation state as a fundamental unit of global political power will be subordinate will go away completely, but there will be other forces that will be more important in deciding the allocation of resources, the movement of people at a global level. And then the last is fundamental operating models, this is more abstract deeper stuff, you have to read things like Foucault and utilize to kind of get a better sense of it. But these are the ways the toolkits that we have for going out and getting things done. 
So, for example, in the contemporary environment, after World War Two, kind of the Six Sigma bureaucratic hierarchy is an operating model is how you can get things done and we got pretty good at it, but it put us on the moon to build the interstate highway system. This stuff is getting thrown out all the way and some significant things around completely deconstructing the model. Even like the corporation is almost certainly on the horizon. And that day again, I go ahead and predict that the the form of corporation that we've seen for the past hundred years is almost certainly on its way out and probably in the next 20 years. So that's big stuff, right? Those are major disruptions. The key message is not only are they big, but as they disrupt, starting at the outside and working their way in, they bring with them lots and lots and lots of other stuff. So think, for example, you guys are coming with the TPP. The Trans Pacific Partnership, it's sort of a international law on trade. So in many ways, I mean, the big trade but in many ways, certain songs have it started all the way back in 1997, when I was getting involved in the mp3 movement, because the mp3 movement was hitting a very weak spot, which was the music industry. They were very, very weak, right, very easy for them to be disrupted. 
In fact, they were disrupted almost instantaneously, except for one thing. They all had really strong relationships with governance. The music industry had very tight relationships, with legislature with with judges. And so that's They held on to. And what they did is that poll, all the disruptive energy was pointing at the music industry at a market level and put that energy onto the legislative level. And they've been fighting the copyright battles ever since for into the past decade and a half and other guys have gotten into it as their business models have been threatened. And a big chunk of the TPP is in fact, a leveling up of governance playing the game of defending older models, okay. And as governance itself then is put on the table. And as it begins to be disrupted, giant chunks of the world begin to change relatively rapidly. You know, the blockchain stuff is blowing people's minds. I've already been engaged in several conversations with folks who are offering the idea of jurisdiction, innovation, right, go to some local jurisdiction of sovereign nation, they will modify their laws to optimize for particular business models that are not legal in other kinds of nation states that the blockchain can really take great advantage of. And you can think of thousands actually, even just a few seconds and what is the international legal structure.
With that, it's really hard to say but it's going to be interesting and disruptive. But here's the thing, if I'm right, and we're actually going in through a level of 1000 10,000 year disruption, it goes even deeper than that. The physical layer of the institutional structures that we use to do things like the way we do governance, the way we do business is kind of like the candy coating on the outside of the things we actually need to have done. So this is a map of what the core really looks like. You've got things like politics, art, medicine, you the kind of general categories of what human beings need to have done. And inside that are actually the deep human needs that every that emerge, that these things emerged from, like the need for identity, the need to deal with the fact that you're going to die, the need to have ideas and creativity, right, these are the core things that you know, unless the transhumanist stuff really takes off, these are probably not going to change in this way. So will end up happening is that new things are going to close them and this is like the core This is a source of raw energy. People need to have these things satisfied. And then old models go away. These models, these things need to be satisfied. So new models build up around them, and the build up around them and very complex fashion, you take a look at your history about how these things have happened in the past, you know, certain, sometimes things like medicine and religion are part of the same structure. And sometimes they'll break apart and they'll be very different.
Sometimes family and law, the same structure, right? So at the core, what I think right now is that we can be looking at three big ones. One is identity, you know, who are you? What does it mean to be you? What does it mean to be understood in relationship to other kinds of identities? The second is sense making, how do you make sense of the world? What the hell is going on? And how do I behave in this environment? And the third is meaning, what is actually important, what is meaningful? Where are places where I ought to where I should put my energy and my focus? Right? those answers to those questions have really easy simple answers in mature coherent cultures. Right now, they're falling apart like crazy and they're going to fall apart faster as the old legacy. The answers are shown to be in the middle of disruption.