Alright, so now I'm going to drop down one more level into some more concrete stuff of how does this play out? Right? So let's make some predictions about what kinds of things in the world, we might be able to actually do something about. I'm going to start with themes and then look at drivers and then go through some actual examples. So themes, the old these are kind of the rules of the old legacy model, right? It was dominated by things like hierarchies ways to get things done and audience was a, you know, the creator audience relationship. And we've got some new things right. So obviously, and these are pretty obvious, I hope everybody here gets them. The new model is going to be built on networks. controls can be replaced with flexible protocols without opt in. processes can replace with flexible principles that drive and create parameters but don't actually control inside boundaries. audiences can be replaced by community customers, Facebook community, everything moves to co creation. The idea of transaction is replaced with relationship which is just say that goes into extremely high complexity transactions are simple and tend to be one off relationships. 
Repeat over and over again and have extremely high complexity. And profit is replaced with purpose, which is to say that we are now proliferating many, many, many different reasons why we might be doing things. And to integrate and get to a single solution is going to require a completely different way of doing it. And then major drivers, I'm coming up from a different direction now. So major drivers that are happening kind of like to get at the level of laws of physics, things that are happening in the world, that push stuff that doesn't want to get pushed, digitization and information dynamics. It's obviously a pretty good rule of thumb, that anything that can be turned into information will be turned into information. Remember, when the era a said you wouldn't download a car, they had no idea that they were actually predicting the future, of course, you're going to download a car right? As soon as we can figure out how to turn your car into information will download it, and we are going to turn everything we can and information and information has fundamentally different dynamics, then material than energy. 
Right. Network effects, Metcalfe's law, accelerating returns, understanding what this dynamics are and how they apply and how when you move a domain from more material into more information is a key strategic insight. Next is obviously decentralization, we're seeing that happen all over the place. decentralization fundamentally is two things. The first is pushing power out to the edge, right and powering different components in the in the environment. And the second is a generic toolkit, which means that every element in the network has to have the capacity to play most different roles, right hierarchy simplifies, you know, you do marketing, you do engineering, you don't need to do software, you don't need to talk to people go, right. decentralization doesn't work that way. Everybody has to have with a relatively complete toolkit to a greater or lesser extent, and the authority then gets pushed out into the into the edge and communications through protocols. Liquification right location has to do with fluidity, right as the world changes. And as a change, the pace of change accelerates, things that become solid things that require that they stay stable for a long period of time. Just get swapped. As disruption waves come through, so things need to be very fluid, very flexible, right? You've already talked about this, I'm sure a lot and just business planning. And when I started out the notion of doing a 10 to 15 year business plan was still pretty standard. Right? I came to imagine right now comfortably trying to do a 15 year business plan, it seems insane and impossible, we have to do now is you have to start thinking about models that are responsive to changing environments right now. And organizational model responsive to changing environments right now. 
And then this notion of empowered individuals, right, human capacities can continue to increase. And so structures that are premised on the ability to preventing people from doing what they actually want to do, are going to fail. And structures that are designed around the notion of taking advantage of individuals doing what they want to do, and maybe flowing them into better ways of making choices will be successful. So let's look at some examples. Fidelity is not high enough. This is a model of our current monetary system, how money is made, and this model on the right is my effort. To represent the notion of decentralized currencies, when you have lots and lots of them, they will be controlled with their control. But the fact that money itself is in that process, and there will be some significant innovation on the order of 10 times where we are right now. And a major shift that follows, it will open up a huge number of different business models because a decentralized currency system changes the power relationships between different institutions. Power, right energy energy is also moving from highly centralized concentrated capital intensive, powerful systems into an increasingly decentralized models. Agriculture, right didn't see agriculture is also moving for a lot of different reasons. Remember, ecosystem disruption, we're going to need to take real responsibility for water and it turns out this stuff here on the right, it's a lot more water efficient and stuff here on the left, it's also better for you. Cars, right, we downloaded that car, we're gonna be moving away from those sets of functions. Oh, and by the way, cars are also going to get smarter going to drive themselves, right. We're all aware of that. It's obvious, but we can now start Making some plans. But what does that actually imply? What's going to happen as that begins to unfurl? manufacturing facilities and going to work will go away from extremely large scale huge industrial, concentrated facilities, either highly automated facilities, which take, you know, functions and turn them essentially into information. And then highly customized, bespoke facilities.
In this case, I just want to take a two step, right, because these things tend to go through waves and says one way that's going on right now, in this particular industry, right, taxis, where Uber essentially is now somewhere in the middle of that curve, it's clear that they're going to win. It's not as question of exactly when and how. But it's also clear, if you understand what I've been talking about, that they will then die and they will be replaced by something that is even more fluid and decentralized, okay, and empower the individuals even more at the edge. My guess is we're probably talking about 12 to 15 years, maybe 10 on the inside, depending on other things that go on this. I mean, Travis, just drop it into a cliff. Okay, so what are the challenges and opportunities at the big picture? Right, I'm not bringing this down to a low level, but big stuff to keep in mind. The first is entrenched interests. And I mentioned this in terms of intellectual property companies, you may be able to predict the wave coming, but be aware of the path of the folks who are in the process of being disrupted, are going to fight it. And they will do their best to prevent themselves from being going into the dark night. So what do you do, the solution is first disrupt, and just hammer away at the foundations all around whatever it is that they're protecting, and they will eventually lose their energy and their capacity to defend will go away. If not route around, just do something better make what they do obsolete and ignore them completely. And then also Co Op, right, create opportunities in the new model that the old legacy institutions can slide into and feel good about it right, essentially give them a way to save face and save resources. A big one here is going to be in fact, in a bidding governance. The last refuge of scoundrels is control of government and they are all crawling. In that direction right now willy nilly.
So I look to see significant governance innovation kicking off somewhere in 2016. Actually, I think you'll see a lot of that happening, particularly in peripheral areas. The second, as I mentioned, was sense making, right one of the big problems that we're all running into right now is the all the legacy models for understanding what's going on in the world are either breaking down or have been largely captured. So we're going to run into problems around echo chambers noise, like what do you pay attention to overwhelm? There's too much to pay attention to distraction and propaganda manipulation, right, just which has reached epic levels. So the solution there are trust networks were called files and reputation, right? New mechanisms for reestablishing the level of trust that people had if they spend time with each other and this may be mediated digitally. They may be mediated through actual grassroots environments. Think about how human beings are wired to form trust and to create and create and build relationships that are based on trust. But that's going to be a big part of the solution is Getting away from a model where you trust an institution like a newspaper or television program or website, and beginning having more and more capacity to feel more nuanced and subtle trust. And the big opportunity here is going to the attention management economy. Dear God Almighty, if any of you could tell me what I should be paying attention to on a daily basis, like really what information is relevant, and what person is giving me the insight that I need to have, I will go to you. 
With all that I've got. Right, the amount of overwhelming distraction right now is insane. The obsolescence of the existing model, this is a big problem. Now, I don't know about you guys. But all my startup companies are dealing with it right now. You either struggle with the fact that the old model is really inefficient and breaks down pretty quickly. Or you're trying to build a new model in the real time like poor Tony over at Zappos with the hedonic model, which is, you know, equally difficult. So, you know, these things are maladaptive. We know they're gonna fail, they're gonna fail pretty badly. But in the meantime, what are we gonna do? So we need to figure out how to to build increasingly decentralized and ad hoc organizing structures, one of the groups that I funded recently, and I've been working with pretty closely called back bead is focused exclusively on that decentralized autonomous organizations. But decentralized organizations more broadly, as thick as can be a major piece of disruption. And I'm really interested in a decentralized autonomous economy, which I'd be delighted to talk about next, and almost last, increased complexity and uncertainty. And that's just the nature of the beast information is doubling. What is it every nine months, and information doubling leads to vastly larger amounts of stuff. So more scale and more scope? We're pacing the environment. We had a great question about you trying to deal with customers in different countries. What do you do 15 years ago, that would have been barely a question for almost any entrepreneur only a very small subset. Now everybody instantaneously has to deal with that, right? Just bigger scale, bigger scope. So the solution is intelligence amplification and personal development. People are gonna have to get a lot better at dealing with uncertainty or we're gonna get a lot smarter. Whether we're doing that through collective intelligence mechanisms, or through individual intelligence, this enhancement, or various flavors of applied transhumanism, and I'm not kidding, and the reality is, as the world becomes more cocky, I just think about like computers. The higher bandwidth the higher your processor, the more able to deal with intrinsic complexity, which means you're going to be more fit to survive in that landscape.