So, I don't want to go into the history, but there's actually a really neat history of exactly why and how a particular set of ideas became so important in the latter half of the 20th century. I'll give you just one example. But the idea of operational management, which was innovated during the heat of World War Two, and largely to do things like make strategic decisions about how we were going to go about moving ships across the Atlantic, or run bombing raids on Germany, using statistics, actually, the applying statistics to analyze the effectiveness of different approaches, and then therefore making decisions based on statistics. And so operational management was very effective in the military theater and the people who would learn those techniques after the war percolated out into the broader economy and start applying those techniques and things like deciding how to run their businesses. So that's that's the the basic framework of the The order that that we built up until now. Now the the idea of the blue church is trying to get a sense of what it is that is the essence of the the control structure. But control. I don't mean necessarily anything bad. I just mean the mechanism by which we're able to make collective decisions and engaging, effective collective actions is the thing that holds our decision in an action structure together.
The control structure that still is the one that we're operating under, that came out of that time frame. And the proposition is that in addition to this, this is one piece, but it's a very important piece, that there's a dominant role is played by the structure of media. Oh, yeah, we're actually, you know, in the process of breaking that apart right here, so this is good. And we, we know that there's a particular dynamic associated with the kinds of media that are broadcast where One individual or group, because of the nature of the medium. So for example, broadcast television, in the day of three networks, there was only three people who got to be the anchors who communicate it out to the entire population is a massive asymmetry between the speaker and the listener, and there's no interaction, right? So I am in a position of listening, you're in a position of speaking. 
And there's 30 million of me and one of you, right? Now, that's actually a very important dynamic. If you don't understand the fact of that, and it's important that you're going to have a very hard time understanding what actually happened during the latter half of the 20th century as in particular, television emerged as the dominant medium, displacing radio and newspapers. And by the way, you also have a hard time understanding what's happening now as the internet is now emerging as the dominant medium replacing TV. Just understanding that transition. what it implies means at a deep level is sort of fundamental for predicting future states. So using sort of telephone Is the metaphor. I then looked back and said, All right, are there other things that we see that look like that. And it's actually quite interesting that, for example, school has a very similar shape to it in the sense that you've got one speaker, a large audience, and very little interactivity, particularly like the university setting with is a lecturer and there's 500 people in the lecture hall, that is effectively the same thing as television in the sense that the relationship of information flow is effectively the same. And this is important both from the sort of the social dynamics as well as from the psychological dynamics.
Because if as a child, your primary relationship to how you engage in culture is one of almost certainly being a pure receiver, then your psychological development, your set of assumptions and habituation and how you adapt to the world will be associated with that environment, right, you're adapting to your local environment. And this implies a certain set of sort of deep psychological structures. So we get as a relationship between the the mechanisms and techniques and potential realities of broadcast as a as a concept. So school, TV fill in the blank, and the the behavior strategies, the habits and even the capacities of the individuals and the social layer. So when you get to the to the mid late 90s, you're actually dealing with the society that could be understood as the Society of broadcast.
And that has implications for how decisions are made as a society of broadcast is characterized by what you might call the Encyclopedia Britannica model, or the Walter Cronkite model, where you have a set of hierarchical structures where the individuals who have permission authority and responsibility for speaking for having authority are selected in some fashion to be positioned at the top of the broadcast hierarchy. And then the rest of us defer to them. So somebody has written an article and it's like it Pretend like there's some group of people, some group of experts, who have been nominated in some fashion to be positioned as experts and at best take that responsibility very seriously. They pull the the total set of questions back into their centers of excellence and having conversations and academic environments and, you know, groups that get together and think tanks, they produce an authoritative statement of what is in fact, our collective opinion around this particular object. They then disseminate it through a broadcast medium and the rest of us listen to it, cohere around it and say, okay, that's what we do, and then move forward. And this is actually a very powerful mechanism because it allows us to simultaneously have hundreds of millions of people broadly share the basic set of assumptions about the nature of the world, the nature of what effective action looks like, even values, what is important, what's not important. 
So a major piece, not the only piece, but a major piece of the transition that we're going through, is precisely the fact that a decentralized communication infrastructure, sometimes known as the Internet, and all of its manifestations, and mobile, and everything else, radically changes that dynamic. So the internet is characteristically symmetrical, meaning that the number of people who can speak is effectively everyone. Obviously, there's not a even distribution of audience among among everyone, but this not structurally locked in. And the relationship between speaking and receiving has become intrinsically, or at least intuitively, bidirectional. 
Now, this shift implies a very large number of differential consequences. So we can we can graph the notion of the impact that it has on power and the relationship between decision making and action taking. But there's also the impact that it has in psychology, and that the intuitive sense of the way that your brain and in fact, even just your sort of way that you go about making decisions in the world actually have to adaptively change. So the people who grew up in the post internet environment, have a fundamentally different psychological set of structures like deep habitual architectures and expectations of how to most effectively present themselves in the world than people who grew up before them. So what that will mean is two things. One is the set of techniques and approaches that socially evolved in the television and the broadcast era are suddenly maladaptive in this new psychological ecosystem. So things like the Pepsi commercial that so famously was a disaster, right? That's very much the kind of thing that is produced by a broadcast intuition. And we get to send messages and those messages are things that you receive, but the psychology and the technology of the internet or this the decentralized or the symmetrical medium is one of runner we get to critique, we get to directly respond to Things that feel like they are broadcast or feel like they are quite obviously intending to influence us emotionally. We know what that feels like.
And it doesn't, it doesn't work anymore. So we're going to respond to that and our ability to respond, swarms around it and breaks it up. And so this, for example, is a, I think, at least a reasonably good explanation for what's been happening in the political domain over the past 30 or 40 years, and certainly over the past two.