I've actually created a number of different technology companies in my career. My third company, a company called devex, is, was created actually right at the very tail end of the.com, bubble 1989. And we weathered the storm and ended up taking it public in 2006. So I'm pretty familiar with the old school way of working with venture capitalist and raising capital. And what made me particularly interested about the crowdfunding model is the ability to keep very tight alignment between the team, the the company, culture, the people who we are that came together to do this thing. The customers, the people who are appreciating what it is we're doing, and the investors nice if you can keep all of those different forces aligned, then the likelihood you're going to be able to continue to stay in integrity and deliver on your mission is really just dramatically higher. And the beauty of course, is that not only are these people now in alignment, if you're a participator in this in the refund or campaign, then you actually been a partner and what we're doing so you might be also become a customer or you might become an evangelist. You might become even a member of the scientific team. And that's the idea. In fact, the the genesis of what we call the collective was the recognition that this this new concept of peer to peer, this new concept of flat groups of people coming together, dissolving the concept of authority and recipient is a core to our fundamental idea of what the future needs to look like. So naturally, we're trying to do it in capital raising as well. If you've spent any meaningful time in the startup space, and here, I mean, specifically, the high technology sort of space, then you know that creating a new company is hard. Effectively, all startups fail something like 90 95%. And they go through different stages in their development. And as they go through a particular stage, the likelihood of success goes up meaningfully. 
So for example, neuro hacker back in the middle of last year, tested something called product market fit. And this is the notion that, hey, we've got a really good idea and we think it's valuable does anybody else in the world care Do they care enough to actually pay money for it, and so you know, meaningful challenge. And to our delight, actually were able to establish part of product market fit almost immediately. As soon as we started presenting people with the opportunity to buy quality, they were doing so and subscribing and choosing to stay with it for months and giving us positive feedback that they liked it and they wanted to share with their friends. And that's fantastic. So it's a huge milestone and the kind of thing that many companies don't get over that hump on. The next milestone that was very meaningful was that we were able to achieve what's called a scalable revenue model, meaning that the cost that it took us to build the product and to get customers to come and decide to buy the product is less than the amount of money that we make with this because we have positive unit economics, which means that if we are able to still sell enough, have enough customers, then will in fact be able to achieve cash flow positive and this is another really major milestone.
We crossed the the million dollar revenue line, this is actually becoming a reasonably mature product company. And in fact, at this point, the point of this particular fundraising is a relatively mature milestone, which is product diversification, where our intent here is to actually raise capital from a community of people who we hope are great close to our vision and mission, to enable us to apply the science and apply the approach and what we've learned so far, to be able to create more products, many more products, ideally, to be able to simultaneously more effectively meet our mission and help more people level up, as well as to obviously dramatically increase the revenue velocity. This particular fundraising is fundamentally target on the fact that we're now ready to go into new product development. The first product quality has been proven, it's successful, it's growing and building revenue against it. And we've been for a long time looking forward to being able to use the fundamental approach to be deliver on different kinds of use cases for different kinds of human needs. This both means responding to a lot of the requests of current customers and people who would have been customers of the product had different features, but also quite different kinds of use cases in the portfolio of things that we can do with just psychopharmacology is significant. 
And so, in the beauty of our model, actually, is that we can actually build, test and go to market with these new kinds of products, relatively inexpensively. And so this catalog is a chance to get 346 different products out to market, which simultaneously allows us to much more effectively realize our mission and to dramatically increase our revenue potential. The point and the fun and the value of crowdfunding is that you're not just a sort of arm's length investor, you're not buying token sitting up in the NASDAQ you know nothing about, you're actually participating and making something that currently isn't real real, or you're changing the world, in what you hopefully is something that you think is meaningful. So as much as this is a funding event is is it's an invitation to participate. And our expectation is that most of the people who participate in this we've under campaign will either already be customers who appreciate what we're doing or will choose to become customers or become evangelists or become collaborators or become partners. And it is we're actually trying to use this as a way of participating within building an entire ecosystem because, frankly, what we're trying to do is hard and it's going to require a whole bunch of people working together to make it happen.