Alright, so the idea is to I want to share what I think are two pretty fundamental things that will, I think help make sense about what's going on right now. The first has to do with the nature of, I guess, psychology or the way that we go about solving problems. And then the second has to do with the way that this, our society or political framework polarizes events like what's going on right now. So, the first basic idea is this. There is and has been a whole framework for how we go about being effective in the world. This is habits and ideas, techniques, tools, a whole set of psychological assumptions about like epistemological things like how we know what is true and what is not true. Frankly, the greater part The frameworks of Western science developed since enlightenment's first laid down some of the key ideas. That is awesome for doing things like building rocket ships and taking them to moon and bring them back or putting on a Boeing 777 they can fly across the world, but is really inappropriate for the sets of things that we're trying to deal with right now.
And I mean that in a fundamental way, meaning that the underlying epistemological assumptions about the nature of what knowledge is and how one goes about even asking questions is contradictory, right is just the wrong tool. Now, this this fact raises enormous cognitive dissonance. Particularly it raises cognitive dissonance. If you're really good at using the old tool, either because it's you have high advocacy in it, or because it's led you to a position of success. So this goes to the second point of the first theme, which is that human psychology and quite likely actually, higher level abstraction, nature of, of complex systems in general, is that they're intrinsically conservative. If something has worked meaningfully for a significant period of time, it is just the case that changing is usually a bad idea. It's risky to try to change something that is worked consistently for a long period time. But it's like a basic conservative principle. And this is true often enough in evolutionary history that it is a pretty hard hardwired into our into our genes. And this is true by the way also had an individual psychological level, right. So if you have developed as a person And you built a certain set of approaches and strategies that have worked for a long period of time, or at least seemed to work for a long period of time. Your your baseline set of signals will tell you not to stop doing that not to change it, if you change it, change it at the edges, but keep the core intact. And this basic fundamental shows up all over the place. It shows up in things like how hard it is to make big changes in your life. 
It shows and things like why it is that we have a tendency to become addictive, because addiction is when that conservative principle loses track of what seems to be good for us and what actually is good for us. And the seeming is so powerful, that will continue to reinforce and actually maladaptive behavior until we no longer can. Right So, so hold there for a second and I'm going to move to the second part and then fill in the blank. So the next big piece is that it appears to be the case that there is a pretty strong correlation. Between a basic personality type and political leanings, so specifically, there are two kinds of personality types that have been ended up I'm not gonna go too detailed to the framework and, and Franklin in particular attached to it this is just use the language. One is called the treatise called openness and the other trade is called orderliness. So open this is something like the degree to which you like to experiment, maybe we should find novelty itself to be viable and interesting. And so, people who who are high in trade, openness tend also to be politically liberal and this is a pretty high correlation between the two. And then my contrast, orderliness is has due to things like having pieces in their place. 
If you're the kind of person who when you have your dinner you like to have all the ingredients be separate in their own place on the plate. That is a very orderly trait and people who are high in trait orderliness. And in particular, they're also low in trait openness. And they don't really have any intrinsic attraction to novelty, they tend to skew in the direction of being conservative. And so this is actually quite important just to get a notional level, because we're talking about fundamental things that give rise to personality, upon which political opinions are sort of an epiphenomenon. And so when you're engaging with somebody who has is on the other side of that, you're actually dealing with things that will help more foundational than just their, their political opinions. It's about how they go about making sense of what is good in the world, which is deeply tied to stuff like how they're actually wired, or at least core early developmental stages. Now, the key idea here is that these two deep approaches actually respond to fear differently. When things seem not to be working when our social assumptions or social framework for social ideas or social institutions aren't working. The Conservative impulse is to retreat into order the This, which if it is, in fact, frustrated, will become reactionary, which is in fact to retreat into a hyperbolic level of orderliness which is an imaginary orderliness, that is a sort of an Elysium of orderliness that they kind of recall at an emotional level.
By contrast, the liberals will retreat into openness, which the identification of that is, in fact, actually insanity. Right. insanity is the such a complete separation from any consistency that is sort of a random search. And I think this is part of what's going on is that the people who are high in in orderliness are pulling hard in this direction, and are beginning to transform into reactionaries and the people who are high in trade, openness are pulling in this direction. They're increasingly becoming insane and I don't mean that pejoratively. That is a description of the what happens to the mental state when it just begins to explore new territory radically. And this is deeply evolutionary because the question being asked of the tribe is, do we stay at the old watering hole in spite of many years of drought? Or do we leave and try to find a new watering hole in spite of the fact that will probably die on route? And that's a question we have faced many, many times in evolutionary time. And this is the polarity about pulls apart as pulling the fabric of society apart. Now, here's the interesting thing that I want to bring to the center. There's a third pole in this in this continuum. And these are the elites, the actual people who currently control choice making. 
Now what's interesting about the elites is they are intrinsically conservative from the beginning part of the conversation. If you have been successful for a long period of time, using a set of strategies and practices and techniques, and your own psychology, how you adapt to the world and the way that the world and institutions have adapted to you, then you are going to be intrinsically conservative change is a bad choice for you. Now, what's happening to them is they're holding here. And the single, that change of some sort must happen. Either it pulling this way or pulling this way is going to land on them last, or that will be pushing hardest against them before they break because they have the most to lose. If you happen to be, say, Sergey Brin, and you're the one of the biggest winners there is of the game a that is the process of falling apart. It's a really, really hard choice for you to make to leave the watering hole to change in such a way that you may be giving up a lot of stuff. It's a long way to fall. It's a hard fall for most of us to go through a full reboot to a full Snow Crash and completely give up a lot of the things that we've used to survive and thrive in the world. In our money, our relationships that can glue can count on us. That's the thought process that we use to solve problems. But if the if the question being asked if the problem being posed is exactly that the pressure will continue to build. And this is going to start throwing all kinds of errors. The people who are currently in the position that they're entrusted with choice making within necessity of making good deep, powerful choices are simultaneously going to be hyperbolic. He separated from their capacity to make choices. 
Because what got them to write the right to make choices was that they were really, really good at playing game a. But the choices they're being made to ask our choices that are in a new game, which we can call the beat, and they don't have a framework for getting the game B. And traversing from game to game B requires a crisis, which it makes no sense to them to actually cross. And that's a very painful and very challenging position to be in. And so you can imagine that what's going on right now and what will continue to go on until something resolved the crisis is that there's a separation is kind of a rending and a ripping and that Britain will continue to come up as it becomes impossible for people not to get pulled into it and Until eventually some fraction, the folks at the top pop and they go through their own crisis, whatever they need to go through, and they can then transition to the on the other side of this line or they don't.