So the question is my wife, my individual one. And it's funny, it's actually for me, it was very pragmatic. I've been thinking about and trying to figure out how to address the set of challenges that humanity is facing, is going to be facing over the next several decades for these 15 years.
And in the process of doing that, I happen to encounter Daniel, who was thinking about a lot of the same things. And we were trying to figure out how he and I might be able to coordinate because his approach my approach, coming from very different directions, and he mentioned that he and his brother James had been collaborating on a applied neuroscience company and specifically Because the nice thing is the proof the proof is in the pudding. I can just try it. They do, they've been making it find out whether or not what they're doing. And I'll help them useful. So I did. And what was interesting is work that I took the moment we're now calling quality because current version 1117, or something very nerdy back then. And I was actually a little bit astounded by how effectively it worked.
The clarity, focus does kind of flow through and make quick decisions. I guess most importantly, the be emotional resilience was very powerful, because, frankly, if you actually spend time looking deeply into reality, what we're collectively facing it can be quite emotionally overwhelming. I think most people shy away from look into it clearly because you're emotionally overwhelmed. And and so for me, this was actually hitting on two notes. The first was just as an individual level, increase in my own personal capacity to do something that I've been deeply invested in for a decade and a half is very powerful. So I wanted to help within the second was realizing that this is the kind of thing that scales, you can, you can turn this into an artifact product, then you can get it out to millions of people, and millions of people uplifted in some sustainable predictable way. It's very powerful.
I might be able to go out and have personal conversations with a couple hundred people. And I might be able to write things that get out to hundreds of thousands of people very lightly. But if you can get millions of people significantly upgraded in their capacity to contemplate wrote from the perspective They're occupied, what is there specifically to do and be able to actually respond to it? That's possibly the most powerful number that we have right now. Because this is the sort of thing that no one or small group of us is actually going to be able to solve. It's the sort of thing that's going to require a collective intelligence which is destroyed that I've been telling.