Interviewer 1:30  
I'm glad you got that feeling because I was hoping to do that, given the relative complexity of the article. Try to kind of create a continuity amongst those ideas. I think it's one of those things where you kind of have to do something like that. So I'm glad it came through.

Jordan 1:40
I noticed that actually, something I've been reading recently that you do as a writer, the concepts are very clear. So it may feel a bit from my perspective, it feels maybe a bit repetitive, but for the reader, it's really useful to have some kind of structure, where you're laying something out, and then you're coming back and returning to it in the new context that the reader is now built in their consciousness. More it is, I guess it'll be structurally identical to the evolutionary laying down of complex ecosystems. 

Int 2:30
Yeah, I think it has a lot to do with the idea of, you know, building those coherent structures to some extent not to get too meta and loop back on the concepts in the essay itself. But at least that's something that I noticed, you know, developing as, as just a human being in this world trying to communicate with other human beings, and realizing over time, just how complex that can be when you're trying to communicate, ideas that you think make complete sense in your own mind, given all of the latest knowledge and structure that you've carried with you implicitly and you Yet does not necessarily exist in the vast majority of other minds or may exist, but in some other form of translated or rotated or projected shapes that you need to discover and kind of pull out somehow.

Jordan 3:14  
That's a great metaphor, like the topological language. If somebody catches that metaphor, you're going to be grabbing a lot of territory precisely in doing mapping. Yeah, I have the language of projection and transformation. And so given that I have that language, we can begin using that, which is a very powerful language for doing this kind of exercise. 

Int 3:45
Extremely powerful and so that's why when I heard you speak at upgrading democracy conference about a year ago. Also when I first met Brett Weinstein. That was before the whole evergreen controversy, and he got thrust onto the international stage. Which I think in the long term will be positive, given that his message is now finding a much larger audience. And I did hear you at least alluding to if not explicitly using that, that that topological language and that's been something that's been deeply ingrained into my own. My own thinking ever since I started toying with, you know, my background was in evolutionary psychology and behavioral economics in college, but I got really into agent based modeling hink you're out those types of systems and understanding adaptive landscapes and playing with the variables to understand the different, you know, modalities or phases of complex system dynamics, and building up an intuition for that. And I think that that sort of laid this neural framework for how I thought about absolutely everything. And, and from that, it seemed very obvious when I would try to communicate particularly ideas. And then I came to realize that that framework of communication, just it's not part of the general consciousness, right? It's not right. Hot generally, it's not the way we tend to think about systems. And this is actually one of the topics that you know, I don't know, you don't need to jump into it right now, because there's some other things that might be more important to speak about. But I feel as if it's deeply related to the limits of statistical understanding, as we as we tend to use statistics in popular communication. There are particular abstractions and ways of communicating ideas that are hangovers from more statistical as opposed to dynamical perspective. Hey, I have no idea what you're talking about. Therefore, I'm very intrigued. 

Jordan 5:45
So I agree with you. I'm not sure it's the most interesting place to go but let me apply a heuristic though. I don't know how much effort it would take to Explore that area. But given the fact that it is always best in the beginning of a relationship to build coherence, we think about the fact that it just is intrinsically interesting and is an example of a place where there's a current lack of obvious coherence, you have actually theoretically be useful to basically put it out as a play space. plan to that to collaborate together on learning how to just share how we can come to understand more effectively. Yeah, that is general purpose always useful. And probably that justifies going into it. Maybe rationalizing just the fact that I'm curious.

Int 6:39  
Let me try to reiterate and paraphrase it in a way that could give you a mental or cognitive placeholder that might be a little bit more graspable than that first pass, which was not very clear. I think the best way that I've heard it described simply was actually in. Which book was it, one of young Carl Young's books, in which he talks a little bit about, he's a very simple example in terms of, you know, you have something like 100 marbles, and the average weight of a marble might be something like 8.3 grams, but you might very easily come to find out that no single marble is 8.3 grams, right? So there's this there's an abstraction of truth, right? And that abstraction of truth has certain utility that can be used for certain use as a tool for certain purposes in the world, more or less effectively. But there's still a space, there's still like an abstraction gap between the actual empirical or physical actuality of the system and the abstraction of the statistical understanding above that system. And the agent based intuition is far more of a bottom up intuition, that that kind of bubbles up from the dynamics of the system. As opposed to trying to use statistical abstractions from the top down.
Cool. Cool. So with that out of the way, let me know what you think of I know you recently wrote something about Facebook. I'm currently I have something that I wrote that will be published fairly soon. And qulet. I think they are two slightly different perspectives, but I think they're, they could be new that they feedback on one another in a way that could be quite useful to discuss, okay, perhaps maybe you could yours was from the perspective of fiduciary responsibility at Facebook. So maybe you could just kind of elaborate your thought process on that, and then I could come in and kind of bounce off some of the ideas that I've been writing about. 

Jordan 8:50
Sure. So the the original motivation was actually taking a look at the evolving life, landscape at a pretty high level. So including, for example things like Internet of Things. Yep. And well, sensors in general and the natural, the natural path that these particular technological capacities portend is a generalization of the three principles I put in my article. The idea is that Facebook just happens to be an early example of what will show up as being a nearly ubiquitous I'm gonna actually just going to call it a domain, right? So it's all set set of phenomena. 
And so the the effort was to find something so given the fact that that's the case. And given the fact that we just find ourselves in a sort of a strategically interesting location where a lot of attention is pointed at the problematic of Facebook, right, the canary in the coal mine is coughing vigorously. An effort to find a way to buy there's about three things, let me see if I can hold all three simultaneously to meaningfully and simply and clearly convey a us a way of structuring a space for that entire domain. That because it's actually already been, it's a kind of a principle of biomimicry, a way of structuring the space that has already been the subject of a very long evolutionary history with a variety of different early examples that actually show up in the same domain. So we get the advantage of not having to do sort of classic top down design, but be able to do something that the my deep code group calls transcendental design, which is something that utilizes both bottoms up and top down methodology in a coherent space to develop those kinds of structures and so on. That then led to the proposition that the concept of fiduciary responsibility, which is as far as I can tell, at least 1200 years old, and spans all of common law turns out to be a way of creating a boy instantiating a structure that already lives at a deep level of intuition across the entire collective intelligence of the legal set of legal institutions that span all of Western civilization. And by the way, also most of India.
That is a very precise way of selecting the right kinds of values that are responsive to the set of characteristics of the domain. And just to recapitulate the characteristics of intimacy, ubiquity, and I called it AI but it's actually just a symmetry. So that was the idea. Oh, sorry. And then of course, by virtue of being simple and present and intuitive, that hopefully would also have strategic ability to catch on the way that exists right now, and perhaps bring some level of increasing consciousness of both the nature of the problematic and of the well and with the right kinds of solutions should feel like that didn't look like that feel like I didn't talk to you about Joe Edelman stuff. Um, I don't think we've discussed it explicitly, although I'm like, familiar with passing with. The Joe is not involved in this conversation. But if you tap into the primary move that he's making, it's completely alive. It's a private move that you're making as far as I can tell, and also associate with this which is to say, beginning to be build skill set at the layer in the meaning making stack, not the sense of making stacked with a meaning making stack. Yep, that is at the lowest level. So that was the other trick of driving back here, which is to start to get people to become aware of their own values, complexes, and how those value complexes relate to each other, and then show up and how they make sense move from making sense of to making choices in which is how I defined meaning making in the world. That's the context. 

Int 13:30
Yeah, within a complex system, I kind of see those, you know, within that meeting making framework kind of see them as like the nucleation events in the feed forward process of, of instantiating structures that would would then display your meaning or display values in society, right. So, so you get you get environmental stimuli, based on you know, you know, the way that the way that you perceive all of that stimulus is this extremely layered. response that occurs across, you know, the biological, the sociological, biological and cultural, technological layers at all of these different, I guess you might call frame rates of kind of iterative frame rates, and they're all happening simultaneously. And so when information comes in, based on the, I guess what you might characterize as self sovereign structures within the individual mind, you might grasp on two different facets of that information or those stimuli, and, therefore, respond in a host of different ways based on what you perceive to be the most relevant way to act in your environment. Yep, and and when those types of patterns start comparing into something that gives you a response that is, perhaps desirable, or may, you might not be desirable might be just addictive. But but that kind of starts threading into the idea of meaning as a pattern. It's something that you can actually grasp in a way that is That is subjectively relevant to your desire to either consciously achieve a goal or act on behalf of one of the goals that larger structures may have for you and have embedded inside of you, without your conscious knowledge.

Jordan 15:18  
Oh, okay, so you actually grab three distinct domains simultaneously. And there's certain places where you actually drop two into a concept I saw it open the distinction between what is good and what is addictive. This is what happens when you move from the perception to the true sense making into meaning making it because it's actually precisely in the gap between the feed forward and the feedback loop. So you have a perceptual modality in a sense making instead of heuristics that endeavor to close the bind in between what is good and what is perceived as good and of course, addiction. lives in that gap, right? It is that which is perceived but is not good at a maximum level. So it's maximally perceived and minimally good is Max is the essence of addiction. So that's like catching the catching, what happens is the feed back loops didn't starts to come back from adaptive reality. And so you have this in this sort of double double loop layer, where you've got your internal subjective processes that are moving from these multi layered multi multi modal, differentially frame rated perceptions sense making meaning making choice, making action taking processes, and then you've got it which then in the sense making the meaning making you're going to be making sure ristic propositions around the degree to which the consequences that you're perceiving are themselves good. And then simultaneously, you have underneath the other half, so I think of it as a circle. 
On the other half of the circle, you have actual complex reality which is doing tiny The same thing, which is to say that your actions are now propagating out into reality, changing the context or the nice the environment in which you're in and feeding back on you in ways that are propagating back up through that process, which will show up as In fact, actually adapt. And then that's that sphere is the total loop. It's really interesting that if you actually recognize that you've got a subjective objective slice, and you run a sphere throughout all of that recognize that your sovereignty must contain that entire sphere. But your agency only lives in the top half of the sphere. And the intermediation between the subjective and the object is the area of perceptual energetic relationship then that like that's the model that I work with. 

Int 17:55
I like this spherical idea. I'd like to show you some of the drawings that I made a while ago.

Jordan 18:00
You live in San Fran? I'm going to be coming up there apparently, some people requested that I come up and give them some advice and mentorship. Okay, so I'll be coming up May 9th. I'll probably be a little while like maybe four or five days. I'm going to meet up with another group of people called the Terran collective. Because they all met it Burning Man, they also go by superhero names. I know one of them is promethium. I don't know. Okay. They're very interesting group of folks. They got some good stuff going on with dall stack. They're doing a lot of the delivery. Kind of a really coherent product application development team, but also it's a big conceptual space that they're working in. So I'm also gonna be hanging out with them. But it'd be awesome to actually be able to connect with you when you say you live in San Francisco in the city. Yeah, yeah, I'm in Nashville. It's okay. It's super easy. Ah, yeah. To tie the urge to kind of try to take what you're saying and map it on to some of the ideas that I was that we began the conversation with respect to some of my intuitions with respect and based emergence.

Int 19:44  
When I was studying a lot of this stuff, I was very deep into topological structures and trying to understand topological structures as not just landscapes but also potentially ways of thinking about the structure of information flow throughout complex systems. Okay. And so you're kind of talking about this sphere through which there are these dynamic feedback loops moving and counter currents that are interacting with one another. Yep. In a way. And I think that our thinking there aligns and parallels one another, quite, almost an interior fashion. But I think that's, that's partly just because we're trying to, we're trying our best to perceive reality and perhaps perceiving certain patterns that you know, the words don't exist, the patterns don't exist. So we're grasping at the linguistic structure that we have, and it's within similar domains. 
Are you familiar with the idea of like a mobius strip, right? So, I was looking at these ideas through the metaphor was invested climb bottle which the point at which it intersects with itself, you would insert yet another client model information, you can kind of look at the, the top of it as the top of the energetic surface that makes contact with the environment. Yep. And then when the information you can kind of picture the information flowing down one side of it into the nested recursion, but then then converging two points at some layer of depth at which it decides to travel back up the recursive surface. Yep. On the inside of that same topology. Yep. So now you have information flowing down the recursive topological structure on one side and up it on the other side.
But there's information flowing up and down. And then there's a membrane right, which is the quote unquote surface. Yep. Well, then it's not too far from there to think that there might be Some sort of information exchange or receptors between you know information moving up the loop from various depths, right and I kind of look at when I talk about these different timeframes, I would kind of map the different timeframes of codified structures to the different levels of recursion of this nested client bottle structure. And so, in the deepest version, so sir, some information would trigger something that happens in your environment, some information might flow all the way down to the deepest evolutionary structures and interact with something there and only at that point would it caught a phi and perhaps activate a neural structure that then flowed back up that system but that's quite rare because most of the time, it's like a seed or like a Pinsky, gasket or something along those lines where most of the time it would, it would activate something far more recent. And, and those loops I'm getting A lot about the the concept to tie this to some extent back into Facebook and social media and thinking about the structures of communication and the way that we interact with information. How does it impact our ability to exist at different levels of that recursion? And what is the implication of that? Like? How are we creating structures that trap us at the surface of that structure and prevent us from existing within some of the deeper cultural or historical patterns of thought? I don't know, I'm trying to stack too many concepts right now. 

Jordan 23:37  
That's a serious stack. Why don't we grab the last thing you said and pivot on that? Yes, contextualize the situation of Facebook. Live a nice, simple articulation of Facebook. I can hold the entire stack that you just articulated in depth for sure. Yeah. But if we start back at the prosaic and I think those two touch points might be good. So retell that story just to the point of view of Facebook.

Int 24:11  
So just from the point of Facebook, and perhaps this is somewhat related to it. Um, you have to forgive me to some extent, because for many of these ideas, I just haven't articulated them within my own mind.

Jordan 24:33  
Can I introduce something to you? Welcome to deep code. So it's called rule omega, okay. Rule omega is the the only ethical and epistemological principle of deep code and what it articulates is what you just said. Also the ethical corollary, which is if I am operating under ruled omega, then you recognize denies that I am the kind of being that is endeavoring to grasp really difficult, distant, nuanced things. And by definition, when I'm expressing them to you, they're going to be very hard to understand. In fact, I haven't yet even come close to figuring out what the hell I'm doing. However, in I am absolutely acting in good faith to try to do this thing in collaboration with you. And you by agreeing to rule omega are also operating in absolute good faith to try to listen and to collaborate with me, so that we are forming a shared consciousness to do this work that we are in fact both doing simultaneously. It's, it's associate with the thing you said earlier, which is we're trying to perceive reality, and that ain't easy. We're very poorly equipped to do it. So understatement of the century. So it's like really make as the ultimate Mia culpa, you are fully forgiven from the beginning so you're free and safe to try and do your most acrobatic work. And sort of I'll do my best as service and net. But of course will also be simultaneously doing that same thing. So it's real, like real time jazz acrobatics over a pit.

Int 26:26  
So, I will step back and try to tell the Facebook story and tie it into what I was discussing. Discuss it through the lens of perhaps the intensification of of information flows, and what the intensification of flows through a system, you know, a network right information in a network of actual agents such as ourselves information has flowed through us across the surface of humanity's mental landscape, so to speak, at different rates across time. Right? So, you know, at one point, we didn't even have linguistic symbols that could carry information between agents. And therefore, all of the actual information that we exchange with one another had to be actually embodied in our relationship structures. 
And I kind of allude to that to some extent in the message that you're reading. But then, you know, there's this and I think, you talked about this to some extent, when you have these, you have innovation, you have moments in which the complexity of the environment and the system in question, synchronize around a new modality of exchanging information that gives you a sort of positive feedback loop and you gain some territory with respect to the expressive capacity within your network and also again, you gain a bit more control over the domain that may have once had a greater degree of control over you. You know, we actually start gripping the fabric of humanity or grab grabbing the fabric of reality a little bit more we gain the capacity to impose our intent upon more and more complex more complex environments, that once had had that was almost exclusively exerted their intent or lack you know, just exerted their exerted themselves upon us, whether intentionally or not.
So, you can kind of look at this as a macro pattern of these, this continuous series of innovations from you know, from from language to actually printed word to different modalities of actually increasing the rate of speed and the distance at which that written word could be transmitted, right. And so we create, we keep creating these increasingly capable higher speed networks of infusing human minds in the network with larger and larger degrees of symbols that carry meaning. And therefore, any given moment of a particular individuals existence is going to be infused with an increasingly large amount of the symbols. And that's deeply related to this notion of sense making. In terms of, we're at this moment where I often think a lot about like, what are the limitations of the structural biology of the human mind in terms of, you know, the upper bound of making sense of stream of symbols and then it becomes a question of you know, what is your What is your and this this ties into your self sovereignty idea like what is your sampling rate? What are the types of things that you target? How do you make sense of what it would sound so, my phone my phone was ringing I got um how do you how do you actually you know, what are your interpretive frameworks that you apply to the selection interpretation of this increasing rate of symbols and, you know, is there some point at which no interpretive framework may be sufficient for anyone agent to have the ability to navigate this system in a meaningful way. And therefore, you know, I think perhaps to some extent that's that's the point at which collective intelligence becomes not merely useful, but perhaps the only metric ism of don't the only possible the only possible technology or the only possible capacity that we could develop to allow us to thread the existential needle. So I look at that as there's an accelerating nature to that. Then the question becomes with respect to something like Facebook or social media, how much of that is if you try to develop systems that intentionally leverage the human brain, to lock people within systems that they are not well equipped to navigate or make sense within what is that doing to their What does that doing to their ability to engage with the other parts of contextual reality or deep time or deep, deep code perhaps, that they may need? To be able to even become a useful part of the collective intelligence.

Jordan 32:04  
Yeah, that's absolutely correct. The short answer is it degrades. I wrote an another essay about this about two months ago. I think what's the problem of social media something like that. Cry actually explicate those ideas more deeply. And there's actually, I think, five distinct characteristics of that phenomenon. So one, for example, I met I think I'm doing it at one or two levels of abstraction, or less abstraction than you are right now. But for example, the the problematic of the relationship between weak and strong social links, that there's an optimization. So yeah, so you've got a finite amount of attention. You've got to find an amount of adaptive capacity. This is just true. may not be but it seems to be. 
We're always wired to always be using our maximum adaptive capacity in the in the context of where it makes sense for us to point our attention. And in the context of something like a social network like Facebook, what ends up happening is that we're living in a simulation that grabs a substantial amount of our attention, precisely because it plays on very, very effectively plays on that gap between what seems to be good and what is actually good for us. And it does so in a way that turns our adaptive capacity to, to optimize for complicated rather than complex environments. This is something that Joanna has been writing about a lot and for weak social signals and affinity relationships, rather than strong social signals and coherence relationships. And this has to do with the thing you're talking about of surface to death. Yeah, that there is a way for human beings to become very, very adapted to surfing.
Fast, quick, shallow affinity. But almost by definition at the expense of the allocation of those finite resources to slower, deeper coherence. And I believe that's not quite good. There's a way to demonstrate that the topology, that kind of collective intelligence always fails. And in fact, always fails in an accelerating finite time meaning, the more you progress towards that nodal point, the more rapid it actually collapses. It's isomorphic with the reason that complicated systems collapse, so as it being sort of a similar fundamental dynamic, which is why it's difficult, like unpacking the same fundamental conceptual scheme across three different material or physical instantiations.

Int 35:39  
Let me try a metaphor on for size here. I used to more of an intuition pump, but I used to try to navigate this idea myself. Um, and let me just maybe just frame it in the idea that I would posit that the issue may be that the the way that the conduct Structure evolves disconnects us from all of our prior evolutionary knowledge in a way that makes the system fragile. Yeah. So the way I kind of I've used this idea to conceptualize it to some extent is and I imagine I imagine the sum total of human knowledge not just conscious explicit knowledge, but you know even the the knowledge that we have latent within us or just our historical systems or systems of record or artifact actual history, that we may not have fully extracted all useful information from but but it all exists layer upon layer, but I kind of look at it as a sphere and all of that is this layered liquid and the closer into the center of that liquid sphere you go, the viscosity increases and the buoyancy your your push your It takes, the further you go into the center, the more energy it takes to move further into the center. Right? Yep. And so it's, it's hard enough and so like, I kind of think of it like, without any conscious cognitive effort will float on the surface and Bob there and that's probably the point. So in the state of non exertion, you know, you're kind of at this point where you're bobbing on the surface. And it's minimal suffering, in terms of just the amount of effort that you might have to put yourself through it. To extract otherwise useful value from this structure that from the structure that that otherwise resists our ability to, to extract knowledge from and this kind of master Peterson's idea of the archetype of chaos, right? It's like the sphere of chaos, you can even look at it. You could look at it at that, although he maps that idea to the more of like the external domain of the unknown, but I think that it can also be applied to this this domain of our own unknown incompatibility. Union and consciousness, and you'll get closure on it. 
And then this interesting part, and then none of that part is necessary, necessarily the most part about this. The most interesting part about this is that, you know, we have to we have to dive we have to develop structures and the same way that you would develop a structure to actually dive underneath the ocean you know, you need to have a scuba tank or You need to have a summary. You need to have these mechanisms that allow you to withstand pressure and, and not be pushed back up to the surface or drown in the depths of this, this otherwise volatile and hostile, hostile environment to char particular consciousness. And so it's like you then we created the structures of social media or connectivity. Not only are we buoyant at the top, we've also created a massive network that creates a surface tension in a way. And that's the one takeaway from this whole metaphor of structures that we have these different layers of communication, that incentivize particular modes of interaction, and to the extent that you are enmeshed in that surface tension, you're going to spend even less time diving under the depths of this, this knowledge, this kind of like the sphere of knowledge and actually Spending the energy to take those deep dives and stay in those deeper layers because, you know, this is the idea we have these this concept of FOMO. That's now very much in this light guys. And I think this is we're kind of trying to articulate this notion of an extreme surface tension to one another, because we have extreme visibility into one another's lives extreme visibility into all of the other processes that are going on at that behavioral surface. And that is going to pull us away from the types of exploration of the the invisible, the exploration of the historical the expert, you know, the exploration of the textual, it creates this gravitational pull away from it or surface tension. I don't know. Like I said, this is this is all just in my head now. So I need to articulate it working actually spell it out in a way that's compelling, I think but with that raw material, I'll toss it off to you. That was terrible.

Jordan 40:56  
But would you like to be the bass player? Yeah, that felt like bass to me. I was just listening to jazz. So you know, we just handed it off to to Mingus to play a little bass solo. Alright, so what are the cut, one of the terms that you used is actually a term that I wanted to bring into the conversation which was discussing. So I'm going to play with viscosity for a little bit in this metaphor. So, we have a feedback real or a relationship between the surface and the depth in this sphere. And it is a relationship that has, the deeper you go, the higher the viscosity. This means two things. One is the more energy that is necessary to be able to cause it to move and the more leverage it has on causing movement in the other opposite direction. Yes, so it's like, the, the, the atmosphere of Jupiter. Yeah, you know, the as the as Jupiter rotates the core? Yeah, I guess the deep the deeper you go the more subject you would be to its inertial forces. That's right. And the more the slower and more intense the execution the the execution of energy is to generate I'm going to just say change. I can't go any further than that.

Int 42:41  
So that's one piece. And it also speaks to the idea of the deep code, the notion of deep code, because the energy required to actually change that structural, you know, code of our culture requires this massive exertion to yield even the smallest of results, but because it underlies every other structure, those small changes may be enough.

Jordan 43:08  
That's right. That's exactly right. And well, okay, so let's just slide to that pretty quickly. Let me tell you what we're doing. I could probably give it to you in its raw form, but let me give it to you in a slightly simpler form and then come back. There's a guy named Tom shape Tom is working was the was one of the first guys I think, the founder of Google X, then he left and he is working on trying to do very kind of practical things in large scale system dynamics. Specifically, he grasped the problem of carbon remediation. Right. So he looked at the whole system is that ocean where the places where we're sort of in the most trouble in the students timeframe and the most distant from any Bible solution and he found in two places one was coral reefs, and the other one was carbon remediation. So the proposition is that we're already so far out of our skis on carbon that even if we cut emissions to zero wouldn't solve anything, we have to actually get extremely good at pulling it out of the atmosphere and yeah, and sequestering it. So then, and this is this is the key point, he then ran a sort of a design spec on what is it? What is a viable solution even look like? And what are the parameters and so, what he was able to discover or identify was that we had to get to the point where we were pulling something like 10 Giga tons of carbon from the atmosphere on an annual basis by 2025. To have any to be a viable solution. We should just say that if we didn't get that amount in that time frame, or sooner, then the feedback loops of the district the destabilization, a larger system starts Get out of control pretty quickly, like you might be plus or minus two or three years. But it's sort of an envelope. 

Int 45:05
Which is the type of conversation that we really can't meaningfully have in the public consciousness in this climate. You know, the sense of dependence on those thresholds and what that actually means or might look like if it does start kind of falling into that phase shift.

Jordan 45:30
That's a meaningful problem. And then I'll clean up, so we'll get there in a second. Once you correctly characterize what a viable solution must look like, that's one characteristic. Well, I guess there's three. Others include that it must also not generate unanticipated consequences in other domains, doesn't do us any good to do carbon remediation in a fashion that, logistics accelerates, collapse the coral reef, so it has to be from a biomimicry perspective, I do no harm solution at all. So hit this design criteria. Once the design criteria put in place, then you can begin the process of actually trying to figure out how to construct a solution, see if there's anything within the viable designs. Nice, that actually works.
As it turns out, he actually found one, and it's That's nice. And so he's in the process right now of building it and making it and trying to instantiate it. The point is that deep code tried to do is endeavoring to do that kind of thing at the most fundamental level, right. So, if you take a look at the scope of the of the total problem, can we articulate the total problem with enough clarity that we can then use it to define the design space of any necessary and sufficient solution. And so for example, the criteria of the feedback loop between any possible set of rivalrous games in the context of any exponentially accelerating technological Capacity turns out to be one of the primary parameters. In fact, maybe the only one that matters because everything else if you solve for that everything else actually you kind of get for free as far as we can tell. 
And the binding strength or the the resilience to change that is necessary to resolve that requires a level of structural debt. That is extraordinary meaning you actually have to go down to things that may in fact just flat out be invariant under all transforms. I think this is oh fun. Okay, so here's a different concept. This notion of viscosity is perfect because it allows you to do is also use the notion of temperature. And you can use that to then think of intensity. So if I have a you talked about this earlier, so when I innovated new capacity to deploy intensity, what I ate, what I'm able to do is relate to things that I used to have to conceive of as salt It has actually now being liquid, I can note stuff. And so the problem Matic is that if you're building a self sovereign structure on structures that are meltable, then you actually end up being in deep trouble. Yeah. So, you have to find a way to find something that is actually will show up as solid under infinite agency. Yeah. So I think to some extent, then the metaphor becomes the creation of game theoretic meta-material. All right, keep going with that.

Int 48:46  
There are these low resolution abstractions, when it comes to the idea of temperature and matter. Types of matter and the behavior of the simple types of matter that we then You know, the layman would know about in terms of you have your solids or liquids or gases, or your plasmas if you you know, perhaps remember a little bit more about the high school textbook. But most people don't know that we're actually in the process of discovering what is, you know, what are known to be hundreds or thousands of different types of matter, right, new states of matter. And not only are we discovering new states of matter that are these exotic states of matter, but we're also starting to leverage what we're learning about those states to, you know, intentionally engineer materials that have properties that would not otherwise be found in the types of configurations of matter that might naturally settle within the physical environment. And so in terms of our biological environment, and the game theoretic model, one might look at those as also potentially categorized by a smaller subset of low resolution, game theoretical categories, rule based categories. I think that that might be towards something like Stephen Wolfram's mapping of new kind of science. And like when he kind of draws like, what are the three or four families of these types of authentic systems, just from basic rule sets. That being said, we obviously know that within complex systems, there are all sorts of other attractor states, there are all sorts of other ways that you can stabilize local complexity. And so we don't necessarily know as much about is how to, again, so so that would map to the idea of discovering new forms, many other exotic forms of matter would be actually mapping many other stable attractors of behavioral space, right? But then what we're trying to learn is the same idea of creating the metamaterials of attractors in terms of intentionally taking the reins of creating stable complexity with new properties that might Yeah, actually settled otherwise. 

Jordan 50:55
Right. Perfect. Yes, the whole bat now do this thing where you do a drill down. So imagine that your ability to melt is increasing in intensity. So you power through chemistry, and you're now operating at the level of physics and the power through physics. Now you're operating at the level of that thing which gives rise to physics. Yeah, of which mathematics is a piece. Or actually as the generator function from which mathematics comes as it turns out with mathematics and physics are actually peers. And there is a generator function that has been below both of them. This apology is the is, is closer, you can actually do topology in both mathematics and physics, the North, the level of topology, you can actually go lower two levels, and that's as far as it appears that you actually can go.

Int 51:55
What would you characterize as two levels deeper than topology?

Jordan 52:00
We could go there, but that requires that we actually do that work.The only thing I could do is to say that there's a self-reifying, self-generating structure, that language right there when I pause before structure. The word structure is a pointer not an actual object. It is you know the metaphysical or bros. So we could just go topology, below topology you're not going to be dealing with the partition between ontology and epistemology. As it turns out, there's six distinct things that layered up into that partition, ethics, aesthetics, ontology, epistemology, I can do that you right now. Okay, then there's one layer below that which is the metaphysical or agarose the form the place from Which ontology and epistemology collapse into a singularity, but nonetheless, actually has a dynamis associated with it. So it's actually the location from which structure being and dynamics is omnipresent in a unity.

Int 53:24  
Okay. I just wrote a short poem about this last night. I'll send it over to you after the conversation. 

Jordan 53:38  
Nice, I'm going to introduce you to the guy who actually did that primary work. The lowest point in deep code, that's gonna be awesome. Yeah, and he'll be very happy. He only has five he can talk to, this is one of the biggest gifts that we give them.

Int 53:57  
I mean, it truly is able to communicate about these types of ideas.

Jordan 54:00
Oh God, it's a beautiful thing. He may actually start crying. So if you're going to be building anything and environment that has that level of potential intensity, if you don't take care to identify in the metamaterials, like you're trying to actually build better materials, you're going to be happy, you're going to be having to operate at the level of topology at a minimum. And it turns out that in the in the, you know, under exponential, we get past apology extra pretty quickly, and maybe like 2045. So we really have to actually go all the way down. Now, the beautiful part is that it appears to be the case that when you get all the way down to the metaphysical or a Burrows, the question of intensity breaks down, that you're actually now to level below. concepts like force and then change Men. So, by definition, force and change no longer have any ability to do anything and if you actually believe a level of do so, you're in an invariant that is a place from which you can then construct higher order structures that you could have confidence will be able to parameterize all of the higher order I guess behaviors or dynamics without falling out of the ability to continue to be so in a simulation, his conception is that something like the the information theoretic bedrock then from which all emerges, yeah. permissively introspected Be it. Yeah.

Int 56:04  
Then the question then becomes, if it's beyond the domain of empirical observation, it becomes rather difficult to develop those types of maps and develop an understanding if it's beyond dynamics. If it's just an encoding, and it's a non empirically identifiable encoding. We're working with reverberations only at these higher levels, right? The emergent in variant patterns of the reverberations.

Jordan 56:40
Trying to work backwards, look, this is actually a helpful tool. There's something more basic than empirical that we can actually use. So we recognize that empirical ends up being first person. So it's the binding at first person, which is differentiated from the binding at third person. Which is differentiated from the binding at that thing, which is both, and neither first and third person. And it turns out, you now have closure. That's the lowest level basis, which you can have. 

Int 57:25
So the state of ambiguity between first and third person that is that closure, or is the ability to feedback upon itself, is that the coherence binding? Is that where you're going that 

Jordan 57:35
Fortunately, we can do that. What you're looking for under the heading of empiricism, you can still look for under the heading of First Person is actually a more fundamental way of articulating that first person is just a useful metaphor that you can get lost. If you actually stick in that metaphor, you find yourself becoming a Buddhist, which isn't bad, it's useful, but it's not. It doesn't have everything we need right now. And you can get lost there. But the idea is that if you recognize the necessity of having a simultaneity, or a trial tenacity of what we can call first person and third person and the binding between first and third person, it's important recognize that third isn't enough by itself, you have to be able to have all three simultaneously. Then you have the checksum that science has been able to get, via what we call the combination between math and empiricism. So it's just a more basic and foundational expression of the deep insight that gave rise to the scientific method. It's fun. Have you ever done juggling, actual physical juggling?

Int 59:25  
I've gotten to a very basic level of being able to do it, but not practicing it regularly. It's something that I can't just pick up.

Jordan 59:35
Tightrope walking. So the experience is just a circumstance like that, where you are very much walking on something, where you are at the limits of your ability to be there. But you're endeavoring to be there, any number of people's experiences are of that sort. I was actually on the edge but trying to hold it in place and getting to the other side and like touching the tree. I mean, it's a beautiful thing, right. 

Int 1:00:10
I mean, it is that I think it's expressed quite clearly, Peterson talks about this explicitly as well in terms of, this is why we watch sports, this is why we watch this, this is why we watch those who have practice or those who have gone to the limits of our known capacities to act out the limits of their own capacities for all others to appreciate or potentially try to emulate. It is a beautiful thing, and it's quite powerful.

Jordan 1:00:46  
I'm gonna interrupt, then I'm gonna hand the ball back to you to finish what you're just saying. I'd like to loop into pragmatics like what exactly tactically or materially are you up to and or what would be the most meaningful way for us to develop this relationship? But yeah, so I'm gonna put that in on the stack, tightrope. 

Int 1:01:18  
I've been thinking about it through the lens of the evolutionary metaphor. We are the schism between the perception of stability and the reality of extreme contingency, if that makes sense. So, in our everyday life, I look at it as evolution and the processes that have given rise to us, this powerful gyroscope that we carry with us as we walk upon this tightrope. And We don't realize that we're on the tightrope above a 10,000 foot chasm, because the gyroscope is so finely tuned. But you know, it doesn't take much in terms of you know, if you're willing to go there. And this is one reason why I think people have such profound experiences with psychedelics. Because that is one way of observing just how easily the system can be perturbed, and the extreme potential disorientation, that entails from even slight distortions of that gyroscopic stabilization. And so you'll have these moments. And the reason I think about that through the individual lens because society is starting to have these moments where we're on the tightrope. We don't realize we're on the tightrope, but the gyroscope is starting to glitch out, it stops working momentarily. 
We get this extreme dizziness or fear of heights. In terms realizing just how deep the chasm needs this is, if the gyroscope were to begin malfunctioning in a way that is more chaotic than it already is trending towards. And, you know, I think I kind of look at like Trump like that Trump is this glitch in the gyroscopic stabilization mechanism. Yeah. And it's giving some people extreme panic reactions to the realization of just how fragile a system just how fragile. This is just how fragile reality can become, if certain if certain assumptions are violated, repeatedly, and we push over one of those, those thresholds, like in the same kind of way, when we're when we're talking about the complex system of the climate environments, like, you know, you start bumping up against these thresholds. And even though all behavior before that was was relatively linear and maps pretty well to human intuition and and we Tell this linear story of history, when you start bumping up against a phase transition, or a potential bifurcation point, things start making sense in any type of linear narrative. And you know, when that happens, you know, then the bifurcation point is kind of like, the left or right looking down over the over the over the wire and thousand feet down, you know, and like, you don't want to necessarily all off on either side. And the question becomes, how do you maintain the illusion of that narrative? Or even the narrative? How do you how do you maintain linearity, or at least some sort of coherence? 

Jordan 1:04:40
In this case, I'm going to put sovereignty back into the into the vocabulary is how do you maintain sovereignty? So there's a couple, there's like, I think, three distinct things here. They're all separate and interesting. One is the gyroscope. And what I'm going to talk about today, I'm gonna talk That that using the language used to hurt we used earlier in terms of this unconscious intelligence or stack. Okay, walking on a tightrope is perfect. I mean think about it, a one year old can't walk on a floor. And that's the beginning of the stack, the actual building of the capacity to walk balance, awareness perception can kinesthetics by the time you get to the point where you're capable of walking on a tightrope, all of that shit is being run in the unconscious, meaning it's been running to a domain of intelligence that you don't have to have any conscious control over at all. So you end up having this real significant gigantic intelligence that is acting as an unconscious gyroscope that your conscious volition and perception, which is itself miniscule, relies on, right. Now, there's another aspect to the degree which that is entirely unconscious, and your consciousness becomes aware of the vastness of that for which it is in fact responsible. If it forgets that it's not responsible, then it gets terrified. This is this is the you look when you're rock climbing, and you look down or you're walking the tightrope, and you suddenly become aware of the fact you're walking on the tightrope, consciousness takes itself as taking responsibility for the vastness of the thing it's trying to do, I losing track of the fact that it is just the tiniest trim tab on top of a by definition, equivalently vast capacity, otherwise, you wouldn't be even in this position. 
If tightrope walking, then it falls into immediate overwhelm. Now this is a serious fucking problem because it to overwhelm then the third characteristic arises, which is the wealth function meaning of this stack of this gyroscope is itself, very delicate. And so if and as consciousness falls into some form of overwhelm, we can do this very neurologically. If you get scared, then actually the neurological is very, very easy, right? If your if your prefrontal cortex begins the process of telling a story that indicates that the situation you're dealing with is mytha poetically overwhelming, then paradoxically, your adrenal system will actually respond to that story as if it's a real phenomenon and kick your brain into a into adrenal and amygdala hijack, which actually restrict the blood flow and neurological override out of the prefrontal cortex, radically collapsing your actual capacity to your actual capacity, full stop. And so you end up with this really interesting problem that and this, I think, is the reason why I've actually been sitting Interested in the stuff that's a Jordan Peterson is doing, or at least the space that he is indicating is in place to look at. which is I think a place that I spent a lot of you know, I wrote the my essay on sovereignty is about this primarily. And this is how our metaphors are metaphorical tightrope walker operates. Yeah, you are suspended over an enormous abyss. And you can only do what you can do. And there's a very large amount of what you might do that will reduce your ability to do what you can do.

Int 1:08:38  
So maybe we should maybe we should connect it because there's a lot of structural parallels between the process you just outlined, of looking down without the realization that the capacity to bring yourself to the point, at which you even had the ability to look down in the first place, implies more irrelevance than relevance with respect to that perception of that acute perception of anxiety or fear moment. Right. And I think that may be also precisely we're talking about or what I was trying to communicate with respect to the emerging disconnect mode of being on social media. Yeah, I think that's dead, right. But just at the collective scale of the collective organism acting in that way. 

Jordan 1:09:35
That's really neat. So the implication would be that that's really interesting. I think that's actually awesomely right. So here's the way it's feeling to me. Using tightrope walking as the metaphor. There's a way of having an integrated consciousness that allows you to be aware of, in the right way, the modalities of intelligence that are adequate to and responsible for things like walking. Okay, but without doing this state shift where you're pulling responsibility and agency for that capacity out of those domains and into some other domain for which, that isn't possible, right? So the walking along the tightrope, you suddenly tried to take responsibility for controlling your balance. running it in consciousness was a fucking terrible idea. But if you're, if you're really, really self aware, like you could do it right now, I can stand on one foot. And you can notice what's going on? Like I'm standing on one foot, holding the laptop in one hand and balancing. If I'm just like listening very closely, I can be aware of the fact that there's actually an intelligence that's taking care of that. I can notice it the more I try to pay attention to where my balance is, the less balance I have. Because I'm somehow I'm changing the sovereignty flow and putting the sort of the shape of that intelligence out of sphere. Yeah, but I can still notice it. And that's, that's where it is, right? But here's the key thing. Alright, so given that metaphor, that sphere of medicine for today, we've been talking about these layers of viscosity all the way down to the deep code, there is a mode of intelligence that is operating at that level already. Our job is to actually be able to be present that being that allows us to give that intelligence, the space and integration that it needs to surface and do the work that it needs to do. Meaning we cannot operate at the level of consciousness and intelligence that we use at the surface and try to do the work at the base.

Int 1:11:55
Just to extend your metaphor in terms of the balancing metaphor. And trying to tune into that. So I think the way that I kind of look at this as well, going all the way back to the the kind of recursive, Paul typological stack, there's this, all these process dynamic processes going on deep within the stack. And they're sending signals up the stack that are often in no way listened to by the conscious mind. And especially not there. They're there. They're not only are they not necessarily listened to or tapped into consciously, but what you're getting at is that if you do try to listen to them, and then take control, without having developed an ear, for them, perhaps the interaction can be quite dizzying. Literally. Yep. And it's kind of those who have those who have attempted yoga for the first time might be familiar with these types of these moments where you put yourself in a position where you are now Forced to realize that the natural modes of balance that that control, habituated processes are operating beyond their limitations. And therefore your conscious mind engages to try to correct yet if you have not developed the grammatical capacity to interact with those structures, those emergent structures, and in parameterize them with the appropriately subtle touch, to exert appropriately subtle top down parameterization you're going to fall and rehabituating, that behavior becomes a process of actually developing achromatic capacity.

Jordan 1:13:50  
Absolutely. Yeah, that made a lot of sense. That was a very different set of words than I used, but I get it. That's actually quite inspiring. I feel like I have a much better handle on what's happening. It's really interesting. So this will actually end up generally showing up as spiritual to most people. You know, it is the embodied reality of collective intelligence. Hmm. That's a really interesting concept. 

Int 1:14:30
I think that we're ironically on Twitter, and I mean, meta-ironic that ou mentioned Twitter right now. But Cernovich's recently struck a chord of panic with his followers because he's begun speaking in, otherwise, spiritual language. We're talking about these types of shifts in the energy of consciousness. He's speaking to a demographic who has very little cultural immersion in those types of grammars. And he's getting a lot of friction for that. But a recent perception I had maps very well to what you're saying, because some people are starting to perceive these patterns of coherence, or these shifts in the collective intelligence, and the only language available to them is the spiritual language.

Jordan 1:15:45
I'm intrigued, I watched him and see if there's see what you're talking about, because that also sounds fascinating. You're articulating it novelly. I wasn't aware of it, but it doesn't surprise me. Same way you and I are noticing we have come to very similar perceptions independently, as it seems. Of course, it is obvious, but it would be the case because reality happens to be reality, which is awesome. And so, it sort of it or any agent, any human or any sentience endeavours to perceive reality and becomes capable of doing so, which is just a just a construct within themselves a integrated intelligence with this ability to perceive the subtle signals from the unconscious which also could be perceived as a their body got a piece of perceived reality, and it's give me the same reality. That's actually like the most optimistic back to the unavoidable optimism, it is unavoidable optimistic. get any better than that. Yeah, it's funny that he could articulate the both the problematic and the solution can actually be done pretty simply. Can't quite say it yet in a way that can be shared simply. But it's, you know, not that hard. It's very similar to this notion, this metaphor, the tightrope walker, or the metaphor of the addict, use your passages, like maybe three failure conditions, identify the conditions, remove the filter conditions, and then you're fine. Like it's okay. 

Int 1:17:45
The process of creating the map to discover the simplicity happens to be quite complex. So I know you may have wanted to go in a particular direction to wrap things up.

Jordan 1:18:10
Well, here's something that I've been working on myself. What are the things that you think might be able to help you flow more smoothly, either by getting them out of the way, or by bringing them into being? 

Int 1:18:25
A lot of that depends on the level of resolution. I think, in my own personal life, I'm working on articulating the body of thoughts that have only existed within my own mind in a way that is that in a way that that can begin to create the archetypical or imagistic language that act as beacons To attract like minded individuals in a manner that facilitates more conversation that gives rise itself to higher resolution images. I look at it as like this, this process of pointillism, in which I'm trying to create the minimally viable, pointless image of minimal viable interest to those with whom I would resonate. Yep, on these topics, and then together, we can start adding more points.

Jordan 1:19:31  
I've been calling that generative bat signaling.

Int 1:19:34  
Exactly. So that's part of what I'm doing, and that's one of the reasons why I'm writing in the way that I'm writing. Starting to make some videos.

Unknown Speaker  1:19:48  
So that's just the personal development level and trying to build the kind of trying to build the collective intelligence in my own personal life and identify and integrate into those networks within the world. too, because we are even if we are capable individuals we are but individuals. And so plugging into those networks as a highly positive sum game that I would like to play. Yeah, to the extent I'm capable. And so that's part of what I'm working on. Another part of what I'm working on, is trying to take a lot of these ideas and map them onto a learning system actually, like create mathematical framework with respect to the way that I envision modeling these dynamics, topological Lee, from an agent based perspective. I think if a tool like that can be created. I mean, that it's kind of like this, this experimental map, right? Like, what is this experimental map of the game theoretic reality in which we exist? How can we potentially start developing tools that allow us to begin weaving these metamaterials with With tools other than just words, because to some extent, our words are only so capable of expressing the nuance dynamics of what happens at the edges of these systems. So I'm interested in developing those types of models and working with anybody who's interested in that. Great above that with respect to the paper that you've been reading on the development of human value systems. 
I am fascinated by the types of increased grammatical capacities opened to humanity by distributed systems of value representation and transaction that allow us to coordinate our trust and our interactions game theoretically, in ways that are more sustainable and positive sum, so I think I look at this emerging emerging space of cryptocurrency or what presents itself first as cryptocurrency as the entree to a world of you know, Stable social metamaterials of value. So yeah. And so I've been thinking a lot about how to weave those pieces together with the notion of a collective, so to speak, of those who are interested in creating technologies or services that would coherently grow within the world. And that kind of like a value generation engine is is one way of thinking about it, bound with a coherent substructure of trying to understand and map out and distribute the value that flows into it. So perhaps I'm speaking in overly general terms now, but I'm trying to just kind of get this in in the last few minutes. But, you know, I look at a lot of the negative dynamics in terms of our current economic structures, as emerging from capital flows into the systems and the way that the capital flows into systems shift incentive structures. 
So the particular flowing down a hill from high concentrations of capital to low concentrations of capital, and then creating incentive structures, largely predicated upon that is highly efficient in many ways, but it also has its limitations. And so we're starting to experiment with now emergent, collectively intelligent ways of allocating capital and an organizing creation in ways that that perhaps explore more effectively the value landscape of manatee. That being said, they have their own attendant shortcomings. And you know, the Ico the first Ico wave was a demonstration of that. And, and so I'm very interested in exploring this space in terms of how to negotiate that boundary of Allowing for effective structures of emergent cooperation, capital allocation, cooperation, and minimizing unnecessary competition, but maintaining healthy competition. I'm working with a few people to try to figure out what that would look like, and how that would take form in terms of an actual platform. I have some ideas that I've been mapping out, but yeah, I haven't built it yet.

Jordan 1:24:34  
So let's shift to pragmatics. I should don't want to overwhelm so I'm gonna surface these and reserve them for a later date. But there's a group that I'm working with that is called the good money project. They have a nice high capacity for operational. excellence and good intent and at least the ability to perceive the value of more sophisticated approaches. So they have asked for deep code help in designing, well, their intent is to try to figure out how to actually create a intrinsically stable cryptocurrency. Nice desirable simple thing. They're aware of the fact that that is most interesting in the concept context of it being a potential strategic entree into a more sophisticated, multi variant, not necessarily Metro sized field of currencies and I'm using the word currency there too. Mean, symbolic structures for modulating flows in the way they use currency. So they don't get to the point where they can actually listen to the Santa Fe talk and know what I'm talking about. But they can get to the point where they can know the fact that that is something that's worth paying attention to. And so as a consequence to come, I interact with them at that interface layer, where I endeavor to provide them something that they actually feel is the consensus viable to say, here's how you actually design a meta stable cryptocurrency that will work. And here's strategic approaches that will cause it to disseminate out into the global environment with maximum integrity and velocity. And by the way, if by virtue of doing this, you'll give me permission to load a couple more things on it that are my own private stuff that you probably won't understand your value, but you're just going to kind of give to me. There's some go to the API. And then when we get there, we'll add that so that's an example. There's another team that is building is still the crypto space. They have partnered up With a group that build the largest scale, how's it called high speed trading trading system in legacy finance alone to build something like that in crypto. 
So this group has made it, three billionaires who built this system, they left it there. Now entirely ego driven to try to build something that is super fun and cool. And crypto. The team that I'm talking about has already built an AI infrastructure for doing that. And it's a very interesting and sophisticated adaptive AI infrastructure with the intent of bridging exactly what you were just talking about. So it's collective intelligence resource allocation. That's where they're trying to get to. This is part of the strategic vector. So I'm also working with them and helping them both strategically make sure that they're not making mistakes in terms of how they're setting themselves up and partnering, but also recognizing that the language that I use here is that we've got a game a game, the transition, we have to Be able to build stuff that operates in and with the game A flows, but nonetheless, doesn't it becoming capable of delivering on the game B values.
So that's another group. There's a series of potential folks in the Bay Area who I've interacted with, like the level we're interacting, that they've also been engaging in some signaling. Generous, best signaling effort that what I'll probably want to do is maybe get you into a conversation with the deep code folks here. If I can use your send them the link to your medium posters and on trade, that'd be perfect. Yeah. See how they can map it. And also, when I'm up in San Francisco, maybe just invite you to be part of the conversation with the Terran collective, there might be some fun synergy there.

Int 1:28:50  
Yeah, I love that.

Jordan 1:28:51  
There's a lot of stuff that can come down the road. Oh, and it turns out that the guy has the metaphysics work also happens to be probably the most skilled software engineer alive or in the top five. And so he told me yesterday that he has now reached the point where he must teach me how to code, to continue to be able to communicate with me. So, I know I'm going to be entering into a Padawan ship of extending my coding capabilities from level two to level five. 
Int 1:29:40
It's wonderful getting into the weeds of the complexity. Something that gives you just such a visceral appreciation for you know, for the delicate nuances of the downstream effects of programming. I saw there's an artist who took the memory buffers in a super nintendo 4 games for the game card, basically map them over a particular window of playing this game, and basically took each memory buffer engrafted you can actually see effectively programmer fingerprints, programmers have these different characteristics in terms of how their intentional code manifests itself in a generative relationship with a player. And there are still these attractors. It's like cognitive attractors that they've been embedded in their code. Play out as patterns over the memory buffers and he sells these things as art, you can get him to do any any Super Nintendo game.

Jordan 1:30:56  
That is fantastic

Int 1:31:03  
Anyhow, so we have plenty of fodder for another conversation.

Jordan 1:31:05
You just blew my mind because you you could do the same thing for Nietzsche. Wow. I mean obviously anybody, but that's the example that pops in my head. Holy cow that's killer. Okay, cool. Everyone have a wonderful day.