Int 0:00  
Thank you so much for joining me. 

Jordan 0:01
Very welcome.

Int 0:02  
While we were waiting for you to enter, I was giving my best attempt at a little introduction to you and and and your ideas and your kind of larger project at least as far as I've been able to understand, you know, what you're trying to do and the kind of the major aspects of your ideas. But as I think I said to you in the email, I've only come around to your work quite recently, you were suggested to me by someone who watches these streams I've been doing and reads my blog and stuff as someone that, you know, he thought you and I would have a lot to talk about and that I should look into. And I I'm grateful for this suggestion, because I have enjoyed reading a lot of your texts this week. And yes, I'm just excited to talk with you. Oh, but where I was going with that is that I you know, my I don't understand your project necessarily perfectly well. So maybe one way we could just kick it off is to you maybe could you tell us in your own words, how do you see like what how do you how do you see the the the larger from a large perspective, this stuff that you've been writing under the blog deep code, for instance, and the talking points that you've really been kind of thinking about, and talking about in different places. How would you describe, you know, when you meet someone, like at a bus stop or something, and they ask you like, you know, what, aren't you that guy who writes that blog deep code? What's that all about? You know, how do you think about it in a kind of high level overview way? 

Jordan 1:25  
Well, I guess first, the first order is that I generally endeavor to give people as honest and full answer to that questions as possible. And so a lot of it depends on who I'm talking to. In this case, I'm talking to you and by proxy to some invisible audience that may or may not be also watching this video. So in that context, I suppose maybe the best way to answer it is in terms of the narrative, which is how did I come to find myself choosing to do that?

Unknown Speaker  1:56  
Great, yeah.

Unknown Speaker  1:59  
So the arc of Basically has, I think three major pieces to it developmentally I, I think a pretty standard child of the 80s nerd archetype. So very low EQ, low socialization, introspection, introversion on the spectrum a little bit maybe.

Unknown Speaker  2:26  
Yeah, it depends. I've had a substantial amount of high quality help. So, I think I show up is a lot less on the spectrum than maybe I used to. Okay. But yeah, and, and then the natural attraction to the portfolio of nerd stuff that was available in that time frame. So, an avid player role playing games and avid reader of science fiction and fantasy, an avid player of strategy and board games and of course, a substantial amount of time spent on computers. Originally on, you know, computers that had tape drive And then disk drives and then hard drives and then those cool things that communicate with other computers, etc, etc. Right. So that's a one major arc. And, ironically enough, much like our current we thought nominee for the Supreme Court. I was also a quite unsuccessful in Well, no, I don't want to make that parallel because it's too much noise on that I did not have any girlfriends or any kinds of female companionship in any fashion until early in college. So, which is sort of part of that same archetype. This had important impacts in terms of socialization, EQ, so I kind of maxed out that player class, in terms of being a very successful technology entrepreneur. I was involved in three successful technology ventures in the late 90s and early 2000s. The last was a company that I was the CEO and founder of called devex that took public in 2006 and in 2006, Seven ish. I retired from that entire phase of my life. Cool. Then in 2008, I was in retirement and sort of allowing myself to play. So that play consisted of finding out what the what was really going on in the social field. So doing things like going to Necker Island and hanging out with Richard Branson, or going to the Aspen Institute and hanging out with, you know, whatever, Bill Clinton and going to the Santa Fe Institute, in hanging out with people like Maria gamma is a Nobel Prize winning physicist, and a genius is over there. Definitely. Yeah, exactly. 
In fact, I'm hoping to be able to go back there again in mid October. So immersing myself in that and just sort of playing in that in that field which would become available to me, because I was suddenly found myself wealthy This happened in the context of the 2008 financial crisis. So I happen to be in a place where I could just sort of ask questions. And people who should have good answers to those questions happened to be sitting next to me at lunch, like, you know, Nobel Prize winning economists, and literally the guy who invented the credit default swap as a concept. And what I discovered was a rather shocking degree of asymmetry between the narrative that was being presented at the public level. And the reality of the people who actually had some degree of insight into what was going on. And so I started just following that basic threat of the asymmetry between the commonplace narrative and the people who knew was going on, but in you might call a model free or a random walk, I just started following my curiosity. And what I found was a really rather surprising degree of commonality, which was people who knew a whole lot about some pretty particular subject tended to say that the common place conventional wisdom, was highly unaware of the actual risk that was bedded in the domain that they had expertise in. It kind of didn't matter what it was. So if it happened to be a person who had, this is like 10 years ago, the most expertise in the impact of climate change on coral reefs, or it happened to be somebody who had the most expert expertise on the fragility of the game theoretic aspects associated with cyber warfare, or had to be something about you who had expertise on the impact of immigration on socio political systems, or, you know, fill in the blank the end in this was actually rather large. I talked to lots of lots of people covering lots of lots of territory. And what I found universally was almost everybody was in fact rather panicked when it came to their specific domain of expertise.
And this shows up is a really interesting word. I say net inverse, has an OH bleep a similar relationship to a concept called galman. aphasia. Are you familiar with that? No, no. It's a neat concept. So very galman is his current term. And he happens to know a lot about certain subjects actually a large number, but let's just pick physics as an example. And what he noticed is that he would find himself reading some piece of popular literature, a book, most notably a magazine or a newspaper. So said the New York Times, for example, and he happens to flip to a story that happens to be about physics. And because he happens to be a domain expert, he notices that this article is really terrible, like it has most of its facts wrong, in fact, oftentimes, upside down or backwards. And he gets very upset and sexy, that's terrible. And then he flips the page to another article that happens to be outside of his domain of expertise. And he immediately forgets that that's a category of journalism, as soon as this particular article is, of course, mostly Correct. So he hasn't had an aphasia relationship to a deeper understanding of the fact that the common story may in fact be universally asymmetrically out of alignment with what the domain experts happen to know. So this is kind of like the inverse of that the domain experts are completely aware of the fact that their particular domain is super fragile, and heading in the direction of fragility, but enter into an almost a delusional relationship with their own area of expertise by assuming that everything else is actually okay. Right. Right. So, basically, I found myself as being somewhat uncommonly holding an awareness of the fact that most things actually seemed to be much higher holding much higher risk than was normally understood. And as I started adding these things together, noticing that these risk factors ended up being self reinforcing, as opposed to ameliorating.
So this Then entered into a recognition that or rather rather building a model and attempting to make sense of what's going on. Why, why is this happening? What does it mean? And because I was in a place where I could ask people lots of questions again, I started being able to get access to very high quality models around how culture works, how sociate theology actually fits in the context of say, human psychological development, and began constructing a mental model of how everything fits together in a synthetic integration of the scientific disciplines, and different to make sense of the whole system, including the natural system, the physical environment, the human system, the anthropological system, and the the noetic system, the system that operates the level of human intelligence and consciousness and how these systems actually interoperate. And basically, that metamodel told me was that things were in fact actually rather bad that the civilization and the world that we are dependent upon, are actually extraordinarily fragile and continuing to move in the direction of increasing fragility. And that this sort of thing can actually be modeled reasonably well that we have decent framework. It's not awesome frameworks, because you can't run experiments very well. disappearing was to explain and have predictive capacity. 
So then, in sort of the third phase, this is the deep code phase. I begin endeavouring to use that that model or that set of models in the context of what would seem to actually be going on. So here we're talking about around 2011 around the time of occupy and the Arab Spring, and begin making predictions about what future states might show up in different contexts. And making meaning out of what events did occur in the context of the models. Super to refine the models and In The Deep code arc, then it is basically three major pieces. One is what I just described. So you may think of this as a making sense of where we are. The second is endeavoring to construct a way to, to endeavor to design, a place where we could end in principle should go. So, given that where we are seems highly unstable, what might something look like that is, in fact, not highly unstable, by the way, in the context of what we expect the future to look like so, not just highly not just stable in sort of the immediate term, but it's somehow intrinsically stable in the context of, for example, exponential technology. And then the third piece is transition, what what kinds of things might be put in place to enable us to move the maximum amount of what we care about from where we are To where we need to go. And that's it. So that's that's the, that's the story that was that was compact and useful. That's very useful. That's really great.

Int 12:10  
Yeah. For someone who's only come across you quite recently, that definitely gives me much more context and background for thinking about, yeah, just who you are and where you're coming from and how your writings that I have read how that came to be. So that's really useful. Um, it's interesting. A few things come to my mind listening to you give that story one is, it makes me think a lot about Nassim to lab. Are you familiar with him? I'm sure. Sure. Yeah. It sounds like a lot of a lot of consistencies in your stories. And I've always thought he's really smart and really on top of a lot of things. So that's interesting, just noting that and another thing that I wonder I mean, that was just to kind of jump right in, I guess, with with difficult questions, if you don't mind. I mean, I think a lot about the degree to which it's even possible anymore for us to to talk with these kinds of Steering metaphors kind of like you were just using, you know, we think of, we tend to think of society as this kind of ship. And if we're smart, and we figure out how it works, and we can kind of communicate to each other different proposals, and then try to kind of steer the ship based on on these proposals to get us from one state to another. And I want I just wonder if that precisely what's happening is that in some sense, global techno capitalism has been is being is becoming so complex and so fast, it's a runaway process is so great that a kind of, you know, non human super intelligence in the form of, you know, global markets, is basically now escaped our control to the degree that, that even using the kinds of implicit metaphors that you were using about like how we can kind of steer humanity from one one state to another. You know, I'm not at all convinced that that's not possible, but I have to admit I'm very concerned about the about the possibility of Perhaps that entire way of thinking is, is just no longer something that we have access to like there. We're not steering the ship anymore. In other words, and that, you know, we are now predominantly being steered by non human intelligence forces that are over and above our heads and quite beyond our control. I wonder what you think about that?

Jordan 14:21  
I think that's an accurate assessment.

Int 14:27  
So let me put it in some context. Sure. What I heard you say, and I think it's probably also important, make sure we stay somewhat in sync since we're, we've just met and we're talking about rather complicated things. Yeah, that's true. Great. What I heard you say was, first, something on the lines of some question about how it is that groups of humans are able to collaborate in making effective choices in the world. Second, That there is some relationship between how the first comes to be and the context that it finds itself in. Third, that the context that we find ourselves in is substantially more either turbulent or daunting or itself a gigantic then the how do we have in category in number one and therefore, we find ourselves no longer able to have effective agency. Is that a fair restatement?

Jordan 15:35  
Sure that works. Yeah, okay. So, I completely agree. However, let me then share, how I respond to that. So, the first is to take a look at in the context of category one. What what might be the boundary conditions On how much collective intelligence we could actually aspire to, under different configurations, as it were. Second in category two, is there any way of having a sense of whether we're dealing with a practical problem or a principled problem? And a practical problem is I can't if I can only lift 100 pounds, I'm dealing with a 200 pound weight, I can't lift it. A principal problem is I can't lift myself. Right. That's there's problems that are insoluble in principle and problems that are in cybele and practice, right. And then the third is what are the characteristics of the problem that we that we have to deal with? You know, are we dealing with something where there is a, for example, a large state of complexity? Are we deal with something that says a lot of complex it also has a large rate of growth? Are we doing something that A large state of complexity a large rate of growth and has an adaptive relationship with category one, whereby the more capable we become the more capable it becomes, etc, right? What are the characteristics? Now? It's this level of thinking. And by the way, I should mention, I'm going to use the word I hear where in fact, the the deep code project is a collaboration. But many of the folks in the collaboration choose remain anonymous. And so I'll just sort of take responsibility and a good rule of thumb is, to the degree to which it appears to be good stuff is coming out of deep code, you can assume that somebody else did it and to the degree to which it's poorly done. You can assume and blame me.

Int 17:45  
I appreciate your modesty.

Jordan 17:50  
And then when you're hearing me speak directly, you can take that for what it's worth. Sure. Okay, so, category one This is where I began the process of doing things like for example, considering the blue church, I don't if you spent any time take a look at that, that that was an effort to take a look at the collective intelligence coordinating mechanisms that had achieved the highest level of actual efficacy in in history, just sort of where we are right now. Now that that analysis has basically two pieces to it, I guess three one is aesthetic is what it looks like and feels like. But the most important parts are, what its limits are, it actually has boundary conditions. And so just in fact, not capable. It's a for example, it can only be 100 pounds. And so if you're dealing with a problem, which is above 100 pounds, it's not the right tool. And then secondarily, in terms of historical location now, for many reasons that we can drill into if it's interesting, it's also in the process of a rate downward, which is that the blue Church has an effective collective intention. is decreasing in effectiveness. So, at its best, it couldn't deal with the problems we're dealing with. And it's also not at its best, in fact, it's kind of in our way. So that's one one piece. The other piece is then, endeavoring at this is what the concept is called decode, going to the deepest principles that that we could find. What might be the Is there any reason to believe that there are in fact limits that the blue church is for example, the best? Or are there different ways of designing collective intelligence that can give rise to something which is say substantially better? And I'm going to use the word better here sort of metaphorically, just gooder than the boot church. And while we're at it, since it's not really useful to design something, which is good, but not good enough. Is there any reason to believe that in principle, it could be quote unquote, good enough to address the problematic that we're dealing with and then secondarily, this has actually never been published. But also taking a look at the problem domain, you get a term was called late stage capitalism or techno capitalism or something like that.
Oh, I was just I think, colloquially calling it Yeah, like can have like global techno capitalism or whatever you want. Really? Yeah.
So that was an area. And by the way, there's a few other aspects, by the way, so in terms of the meta model, you have to base complexity, which it turns out is big enough problem that it's worth that the blue church couldn't handle that. So just like the complexity of humanity's relationship with the National environment, all by itself is actually too hard. This is the Club of Rome discovered that in 70s. Then you have the agentive capacity, the blue church itself, which is kind of like that the problem of trying to swim out into the ocean to a drowning person that, as it is flailing about endeavoring to be authentic and a decreasingly dysfunctional fashion It could take you down with it. So you have to sort of address that problem. Then you have the agentive capacity of functional collective intelligences that are orbiting around but not part of the blue church construct. This includes, for example, say Google, or the NSA. These are collective intelligence structures that are relatively functional institutions and therefore operating at a much higher level than the blue church writ large, which of course, is operating at now a relatively low level. I've used the phrase the characteristic of sort of a very large, overweight heavyweight boxer who they swing slow the telegraph their punch, if you're stupid enough to let them land a punch, they can still knock you out. But if you just sort of play a little bit of rope it up they're going to collapse at their own volition.

Int 21:55  
You think that's where the you think that's where the blue church is right now?

Jordan 21:59  
Oh, yes, I'm reasonably confident, my confidence on that it's, say above 85%.

Int 22:03  
I like that metaphor. I think that that makes a lot of sense.

Jordan 22:06  
Yeah. And if you use that to sort of watch what's happening in the Anglo American sphere, I think you'll find that it predicts circumstances pretty effectively, right? But then you've got, again, these sort of these splinter collective intelligences that have much higher executive capacity. And then you have the, the collective intelligence that I've called Leviathan. I think Brett Weinstein has referred to it as Goliath or emergent Goliath, which is what you're talking about, which is a sort of global scale techno capitalism that runs almost like an anti or a hive mind under a set of axiomatic and a set of constructs of how it goes about doing sense making a choice making and delivering an agency. We can drill down any way you'd like, but Good news is it seems quite likely that we can in fact develop a substantially more effective collective intelligence, orders of magnitude, like many, like 10 orders of magnitude more than the blue church, that this is more than adequate to deal with the problem of physical complexity, and antha complexity. radically outcompetes Leviathan, however, may not be adequate to deal with the problem of technical complexity.

Int 23:33  
Right. Okay, so maybe we can do a little bit more syncing up of vocabularies. I thought that was all really interesting. And we should, we should continue to drill down on that, but I'm thinking I was, it's occurring to me now. And maybe I was a little bit rude and not giving you a little short spiel about myself because you have no idea what you've stepped into and who's listening and who I am even so without talking about my existentialist English than I expected it to be. It's less English. What's up British, but the only information I have from you is associate with the UK. 

Jordan 24:03  
Oh, yeah, that's right. Yeah. So you're probably confused and disoriented. So I should tell you, I'm an American. I moved here for a I'm a professor here. So I moved here for an academic job. And I've been here for like five years. But so yeah, I'm like a by by profession. I'm a pretty traditional political scientist. I do mostly quantitative statistical research. But I've long been interested in questions of political theory. And basically, I mean, without going on about my whole story, I, I basically just academia is is not what I hoped it would be. And I'm just really bored basically, and I'm looking for something, you know, I'm looking for something much, much better than then what I can you make an offer. So I basically just turned to the Internet, and I'm just kind of going wild like blogging and having these conversations with whoever I can trick, meeting me in the chat rooms. So an example of the conversation we're just having.

Int 25:00  
What do you mean?

Jordan 25:01  
Well, you've identified that one of the primary organs of speaking the blue church, academia, right, is so inadequate that even though you are relatively present within the center of it, you are nonetheless choosing to spend your time in an emergent collective intelligence, ie the internet doesn't. And one might say their particular reasons why that makes sense to you.

Int 25:22  
Yes. For sure. Yeah, exactly. 

Jordan 25:25
So that's kind of where I'm at. And so I should tell you a little bit also about the kind of the mill you in which I do my blogging and these live streams and it, how should I put this, I'm often kind of called or lumped in with people known as kind of accelerationalists. So I'll tell you a little bit about the just kind of very broadly how I'm inclined to see things and this will probably make a little bit more sense out of the question that I originally posed to you. And so the way that I tend to see it with a lot of the people who I write with and talk with is that Basically, modernity was was a real turning point and specifically what happens at the turning point of modernity is that capitalism is kind of this a superhuman or you know, extra human force that kind of gets out of the bag, basically. So you can think of most of prematurity as this attempt by humans to kind of contain or to lock down the explosive and quite brutal implications of intelligence itself, you know, the production of intelligence, you know, most like a lot of you know, early pre modern religious teachings can can be kind of interpreted as, you know, be careful what you do with intelligence, because if you let the, if you let it out of the bag too recklessly, you know, you're going to, you're going to regret it. And so we tend to see modernity as kind of the point at which well, that kind of happened and intelligence was escaped escaped its box, and and initiated this kind of recursive explosive. process that, you know, we we begins with, you know, industrialization and we're now kind of continuing to live through especially with, you know, the approach of you know, self improving artificial intelligence and all of this. So, in that in that light, myself and a lot of people I talked with are inclined to see the increasing social complexity that you talk about, as this kind of, yeah, this kind of loosely organized super intelligence, this kind of in human or non human super intelligence that is basically now now, so great or it operates at such a high level of it's able to integrate so much more information than any of us are as mere, you know, biological entities. That basically it has its own purposes that capitalism has its own purposes, which is the abstract increase of intelligence itself. And what maturity looks like is this this abstract process in which Intelligence is increasing itself. And anything that gets in the way of intelligence increasing itself, basically gets will just be destroyed and kind of kind of killed off as as as deadweight. And so in that view, a lot of what you're saying still, I mean, what you just said was very compelling. But it's hard for me to, it's hard. So I'm inclined to see like a lot of the blue church stuff as basically quite unique attempts of human beings to basically kind of pull people's heartstrings and push the buttons of, of, you know, moral intuitions to basically hang on as long as they can in a kind of increasing intelligence scenario where, you know, they're increasingly obsolete. So it's like this disingenuous game to basically control what resources they can in kind of their their last gasping breaths of, you know, their agency being being kind of taken over. So that's just a little bit about my, my kind of the larger perspective that I'm bringing to the table. I'm not certainly wedded to that, just giving you giving you that as background. So let me test some. Yeah, some quite sum question.

Int 29:19  
Does your ontology it sounded to me and I think this is probably wrong, but it sounded to me like your ontology consists of two ontological objects, biological human beings, and a single kind of super intelligence known as techno capitalism. Is that an accurate statement?

Jordan 29:40  
No, I don't think I see what you're thinking, I could probably clarify better in saying that. It's more like there is abstract intelligence as this kind of alien alien seed I at the beginning of, of the universe or something like that. Which then you know, manifests itself in this in this long developmental process in which biological humans are one phase of it. And then biological humans who create capitalism are kind of higher phase of it, but really, this is one process, this is one long process of intelligence, basically increasing itself is what it is what it looks like. And so, they were like part of human history, we could get away with the, with the framework that we were in control, you know, so long as intelligence, so long as collective intelligence was relatively constrained, but beneath a certain threshold, you know, the, these this language that we are so inclined to use, where you know, we are looking at the at the territory and we are making these maps and we are kind of making plans from from point A to point B, and how we want to guide our future that kind of worked for for a little while, so long as the forces were relatively weak but once once abstract intelligence gets out of our box. And then it's like something else something else is is is emerging that's, that's beyond our biological containers. But it's not necessarily. I'm not necessarily drawing like a really important hard distinction between our biological containers and whatever that is. I don't know if that's useful distinction or not.
Um, okay. Let me see if I could try a few different things. One is, I'm noticing that I don't have any sense of there being a point where there was a real notion that individual biologically individual human beings had any strong sense of high order autonomy outside of some kind of larger context. So whether it is a sense of real significant lower autonomy say for example to during high Christian, where there was a sense of there being a divine plan that was just what it was, or whether it's the simply the real recognition that say, for example, your family has significant influence over what you do in life. And it is larger than you. And of course, beyond your family, many, many other kinds of nested and non nested forms of things that are larger than you that impose upon your particular agency. I would imagine that it is a rare human, a handful, who have ever had any real sense of any meaningful degree of actual agency in the world that was larger than the context in which they found themselves and I would say that most of them are probably psychotic, manic. Okay. So let's see, we can go to a deeper level. So then I would say that the ontology that I'm working with is one that is Actually, I largely accept the basic premise that there is that this this notion of intelligence is real. I think we will discover that we'll have some very interesting conversations about what it is. And that the characteristics of this thing, intelligence are? Well, quite specifically these, this is the thing that gives rise to curves that are super linear. And therefore it is sort of only a matter of time before those characteristics take over from linear and sublinear characteristics and become the primary drivers in any kind of system that has intelligence. And that's a way of saying larger what you just said. Yeah, I got some.
However, this specific system designed to use that kind of language that gives rise to a particular level of intelligence, I think is the area that I have the most inquiry into That my proposition is that the system does it. So, I would, I would say the blue church is a particular system designed that gives rise to a certain level of collective intelligence. I would say that say for example, the Chinese People's Army is a system designed that gives access to a certain level of collective intelligence, you and I in collaboration right now or a system designed that gives rise to a certain level of potential collective intelligence. And then global techno capitalism is a system designed to gives rise to a certain level of collective intelligence. And enough separating out a particular system design from the large arc of the attractor, what we might call maximum intelligence that we might see as being that which is pulling in and kind of creating an evolutionary pole for all the various systems designs that are in competition with each other. So in that context, where I the way I've sort of I personally have described history is that there was for a long period of time a relatively small amount of the intelligence attractor in the context of the strictly thermodynamic attractor and the dissipative structure attracted that is characteristic of evolution, biological evolution, but over time, because of the intrinsic higher than super super linear characteristics of the intelligence attractor, it has played a larger and larger role, the famous exponential curve. And so, we we are now poised in a position where the combined forces of the thermodynamic and the evolutionary attractors are beginning to lose their sway over the resources of the world in favor of some configuration which is more fully in alignment with the dynamics of the intelligence attractor.

Int 35:56  
Okay, that's fascinating. So you're drawing a distinction between the evolutionary tractor and the intelligence of tractor because I would have thought of those as basically the same thing. So maybe you could speak more to that.

Jordan 36:20
Sure. Yeah. So, the evolutionary tractor is dominated by the necessity of seeking maximally efficient in energetic processing systems and has episodic access to the the innovative capacities at the intelligence attractor on a playing field that is still dominated by energetic dynamics. Okay, okay. So that's basically it. that explains a little bit of the friction I guess in our ontologies then, but that's very good. That's useful because I was thinking more along the lines that infuse your ontology. I think of evolution as a kind of abstract system design. That is itself a kind of intelligence. Because it's doing something it's it's processing information. And it's doing something but we as humans don't know where we don't know exactly what it's doing. We don't know where it's going, right. But yeah, this is to me. So, repeat what I said using the natural language. It's doing two things, it is processing information and it is processing energy. And the energetic processing is the dominant characteristic of the evolutionary attractor and the information processing is a secondary characteristic. So, this is why we talked about the thing you know, survival of the fittest or a selection event is the selection event at the level of energetics and level of information replication. So you have to survive and then you have to reproduce. And since most of the problematics that are resolved by biologically evolved systems have to do with competence For scarce energetic resources, the primary selection event for information processing has been biased towards effectiveness and efficiency as opposed to generativity. Okay.
I'll give you an example. Bletchley Park. So in Bletchley Park, the exigencies of the energetic conflict overrode the information processing aspirations of touring. So touring head, as, as a representative of somebody who's operating at a very high level in the intelligence domain, had to subordinate the, what may have been a dramatic you imagine what would happen if the resources of Bletchley Park if Turing had been able to fully coordinate the allocation of those resources. But he couldn't, because he was operating in a context was actually designed very much like your sort of modern premier dirty postmodernity metaphor, he was operating in a system which was still intrinsically designed around preservation of energetic resources and local selective advantage in an energetic conflict. So it used innovation, it used intelligence, but it used intelligence as opposed to being driven by intelligence first.

Int 39:20  
Hmm. So do you agree with kind of a proposition I was alluding to implicitly, which is that capitalism is a kind of global force that is increasingly shifting the distribution of selection pressure it towards intelligence. Do you say that or no, I do. Right. And so you think that the blue church is kind of this it's kind of this like union of humans trying to basically kind of hold up this, this agreement to to select for things other That intelligence against the increasingly strong selection pressures of capitalism.

Jordan 40:06  
Oh, that's neat. Um, I hadn't really thought about it in that fashion. And I wouldn't say that it was other than intelligence, but I would say in addition to, so the blue, the blue church is a sort of not monomaniacal in its optimization efforts. Or this is not monomaniacal against pure intelligence. Whereas, as you're saying, capitalism may in fact be monomaniacal optimizing for a particular kind of intelligence. So then, this is where I maybe I break with the, with the narrative, it is my considered perspective, that as a systems design, and as an intent, capitalism is optimizing for the wrong kind of intelligence, which is to say the kind that is less intelligent, and is a relatively inefficient and in fact, intrinsically selfish. terminating systems design. So it is something that needs to be considered and is in fact something that we find ourselves in, in conflict with. But I see no reason I have actually have very strong reasons to believe that it is not how to say this right was a term that we used to use sort of godlike in power. Hmm.

Int 41:24  
So, that's interesting. I mean, that definitely flatters my priors and moral intuitions for sure. But I am curious, maybe you could say more about how, like, how do you substantiate a reference to a superior form of intelligence, that is that you could argue is, is superior to that which is being selected by the most intelligent system we've ever had. Do you know what I mean?

Jordan 41:58  
Actually, I don't know why. That's a confused Question, maybe say it again, it seems obvious to me. So I want to see what I'm missing. Sure.

Int 42:04  
So I too want to think it sure seems to me also that capitalism is selects a very particular kind of intelligence and as a system as a whole, it's quite irrational and lacking in another kind of intelligence from another perspective, obviously. So I'm on board with that. But then what I try to I try to think that through and if capitalism is this kind of collective super intelligence over and above all of our heads, and it capitalism, you know, global prices global price system integrates more like global capitalism knows more about what we want than we do, in some sense. Precisely, it's kind of insane brutality, is in some sense, precisely that it, it, it's able to kind of measure and allocate and distribute resources, in line with the sum total of human desires in a way that is actually more effective and more intelligent than Any of us could could create, you know, um, you know, through like purposeful designed, like planning programs. And so it seems to me that it's very difficult to say that there exists some other standard of of that there's some other form of intelligence that we could point to that that would be like more intelligent than whatever it is capitalism is, is telling us a should come next. Oh, okay. Yeah.

Jordan 43:31  
It makes sense. It still strikes me as obvious. So let's actually walk through a little bit. Okay. Um, me think how do we do this, right? We try one path. I don't think it's gonna work, but it might kind of help kind of move this forward a little bit before that has to do with the ability to actually take. We can actually look at the system design of capitalism. We can look at it its intrinsic dynamics and therefore, we can actually model the the kind of processes that is capable of operating in and we can understand what the boundary conditions are because we can model it and so that we can then begin to say okay well given that what are the what are redesigns that may in fact give rise to a higher order, and now, it may not be actual, so up ontological proposition, possible probable, actual. So, there's a distinction and we can take a look at and say, oh, there's a way of identifying that the possible intelligence of capitalism is x. The actual intelligence of capitalism is something smaller than x actually relatively close to x. Can we design a form of collective intelligence with a possible intelligence is larger than x and that the actual intelligence is able to move from zero to one Are to the next in the context of capitalism. So we can we can sort of First of all, we can actually do that and recognize that the same exact relationship up cool. This is the metaphor of the previous discussion at Bletchley Park. Capitalism is Bletchley Park. This is sort of the whole point, this is the issue. 
It is a systems architecture which was originated in a context of fundamentally trying to solve the problem of energetic resource scarcity, utilizing bounded intelligence as a mechanism. So it endeavours to constantly control it's like modern, say, primitive rape to modernity. But dirty took the tried to take the notion of intelligence and put it in a control structure and use the control structure to give act a selective advantage by getting access to the innovative capacity of intelligence in the context of a control structures like a steam engine or a train. exact right metaphor. So it does it says okay, Fineman, and Oppenheimer get together and work on the Manhattan Project. But we, the military political class are in charge. We control the purse strings, we control the resources, we control the domain. And don't go any further than with the boundary conditions are smart, smarty pants and don't go any faster than you can go. Bletchley Park is the same thing. Google is the same thing, right? How do we enable the innovative capacity of human intelligence in various kinds of collective structures to be innovative, but only when it is in fact doing so under the constraints that capitalism capitalism itself sets in this case, for example, it has to actually have a high quality return investment. Otherwise it should it throws an error, it cannot actually be perceived as a valid use of intelligence in the context of capitalism. Right, we see things like for example, in the cryptocurrency space, we're starting to see the recognition of a blind spots in the form of intelligence, the sense making and choice making capacities that described the total sovereignty, the jump geometric sovereignty of capitalism. And we're beginning to notice that there's in fact an abstraction layer, that capitalism is an instantiation of that abstraction layer. We can identify that abstraction layer, and then we can actually use principle designed to construct a form of collective intelligence, which is categorically superior to capitalism. And it's actually pretty straightforward. We just invert the relationship.

Int 47:31  
Please tell me more about that. 

Jordan 47:34  
Sounds good. Yeah, so let me just I'll kind of drop again into a narrative. So let's take let's actually take the actual narrative of industrial capitalism in the United States, as the history of a series of companies. And let's take a company as a at the time state of the art effort to form an effective collective intelligence in the context of of what was happening that So you're going to move from sort of Carnegie Steel to the Ford Motor Company to IBM, Xerox, Hewlett, Packard, Microsoft, Google. This is our, our phylogenetic tree of evolution. And we noticed certain things in this characteristic shift. One is, those things that are further down the tree are vastly more capable of effective collective intelligence of those things that are earlier in the tree. So by any measure, if I take the total number of human beings collaborating in the space of Google, and I measured the effective collective intelligence of that total number, and compare that to the total number of the collective intelligence of all the people who are employed by Ford Motor Company, the number is lots lots higher. Obviously, most people including Ford Motor Company, we're putting widgets together by hand so they're effective collective intelligence was purely actuary in terms of actuation, so almost nil is a classic blue church concert. Right. So that's one piece. 
The second piece is that, okay, so this so this is actually part of the arc that you're talking about. Cool. This is a story where capitalism is endeavoring to constantly evolve our effective collective intelligence into increasingly, actually, entirely collectively intelligent constructs, right, and genes that then collaborate with each other in larger schemes that are in fact, even more collectively intelligent. So then we take a look at the actual characteristics of what that evolutionary dynamic looks like. And what we notice is a an increasing shift from a an organizational and a human resources basis, towards a certain kind of relationship between humans and the kinds of humans who entered those relationships, which is to say, you want a more a flatter, you want a vastly more abundance oriented, we're going to have to kind of open up that can of worms. So with that sort of concepts means, but a different structure of motivation and orientation, direction, a different topology of the organizational framework, which is a more driven by agency at the edge and in collaborative groups and less driven by top down command and control. I would say by the way that that that Apple under jobs and Tesla under musk perhaps will present a different phylogenetic tree, much more much more top down driven, but still highly optimized kind of construct that has certain intelligence capabilities for sure.

Int 50:38  
That's fascinating, Jordan. Now, one question I have though is do you see that as something that we primarily have to engineer as, you know, thinking reflective creative agents operating on social reality or is what you just described in the last part is that indigenous to capitalism, almost in a kind of Marxian eschatology in which capitalism at a certain point starts to follow these kind of flattening out dynamics that you just described.

Jordan 51:12  
Well, I'm afraid I can't understand anything but both at the end of the day, it is in fact, the actual creative intelligence and the accelerating activity of discrete human beings that are summed in some way and oriented directed in some way that we would call capitalism. So, right if nobody if all people chose to think nothing, capitalism would do nothing. There's nothing to it besides the collective activity of people. Yeah. Okay. What it is, is it's it's a mechanism for orienting people towards what they should be thinking about how they should be going about doing it, and then enabling scale largest And coordination between people and in fact, the scale larger than in coordination between scale or the larger than it groups. So, capitalism is a systems architecture that enables the formation of groups of people who coordinate with each other and the group's coordinate with groups. And that allows orientation where individuals can identify what role they should be playing, and what relationships they should form in these possible coordination structures. Okay. Right. And so by being that it produces a larger scale effective collective intelligence.

Int 52:34  
Okay, excellent. Excellent. And so you think that we're in this kind of transitional moment right now, is that right? Where, yeah, the blue church is giving way to a new kind of dynamic in which the central features are what did you say before I kind of flattening and a kind of post scarcity, a situation of abundance? Was there something else that's key in there?

Jordan 52:58  
Oh, there's a lot.

Int 52:59  
What are the main features or characteristics of this transition, other than those?

Jordan 53:08  
So let me actually slow down that. So what I was talking about was what I perceive as being the characteristics of the particular attracted that we was talking about in that phylogenetic tree that led to Google. to slow down and talk about what's happening in this transition. There is a space that is opening up for experimentations in many different forms of collective intelligence that are more effective than the blue church architectures. Okay. There are probably many, many, like I don't know exactly how many there are variations on this theme. So even all we have to do is look at, for example, the distinct characteristics that are showing up in just the blockchain space as efforts to explore different kinds of collective intelligence structure and There's at least three and maybe dozens that are currently being explored. It's not clear which of those have any real stability. And obviously, it's it's one thing to design something. It's another thing for to achieve homeostatic equilibrium. The question is, so in this context, I actually started the back up even further, I have basically identified in my own mind, the way I think about it, it's kind of a strategic level is to retime timeframes. There's the exiting the blue church. So there's kind of an exiting legacy, which largely has to do it at a strategic level largely has to do with avoiding catastrophic effects as the old system gives way. Then there's the transition. Then there's the post transition. My my considered assessment right now is that it is not necessarily the case that the transition the post transition to the same I imagine and I can use a number of different models. To explain why I imagined but I imagined that there is room for caught one more bite at collective intelligence is that to say, still a hybrid mix between scarcity and abundance? fundamental characteristics, right, okay. And then we we do or do not transition. And if we do transition, then you just have to look at what are the the stable states that live on the other side of some kind of transition. And there's only a small number. Okay.

Int 55:34  
Yeah, I mean, that definitely syncs up with my observations in academia right now, you definitely get this impression that they're in academia, there are a lot of initiatives where they seem to be trying really hard to navigate this transition by taking on kind of like half assed gestures towards, you know, abundance and flattening, but really, they don't work so well.

Jordan 55:58  
Yeah, this is right. And I think it has to do with where I kind of am right now. The basically broken up into two kinds of games I call gaming Game Beat just to make it sort of neutral. Game me game A is the game that in the story that I'm telling we've sort of been playing maybe from the dawn of civilization and perhaps from the dawn of evolution, but it's essentially characterized by winning, rivalrous, game theoretic games, though, assuming that there will be a loser in the game, and constructing strategic systems to achieve not being the loser, right. And there's many different elements that make up that so there's the socio technical layer, socio technical systems that are constructed both about axiomatic of rivalrous game theory and about effect strategy in the context of those axiomatic There are also individual psycho emotional axiomatic strategies. 
And so you have both the individual and the collective coordinations that are in relationship with each other, that give rise so if I have a highly win lose optimized individual entering into a relatively Win Win optimized socio technical environment, it won't work. And if I have a highly abundance mindset individual entering into a win lose socio technical infrastructure, it also tends not to work they will show up as sort of a sad story as an example, at best at best. Jim Morrison is another good example. Okay. So, there's a kind of an eye of a needle problem Which is there has to be a transition from a world that is running human beings who've developed mentally been operating in a scarcity environment. So they have a scarcity, literally a scarcity biologist keirsey emotional construct of scarcity, psychological construct and scarcity, habits, scarcity frameworks that are running assumptions and cognitive bias around scarcity models. And that is, in fact relatively adaptive and fit because they are also running within a socio technical environment, which is axiomatically premise of the same set of notions. And of course, within a natural environment, the energetically scarce fitness landscape that is the driver for both of those. Right, so that's reality, hard, bitten, tough, hard nosed, sort of conservative mindset reality. And then on the other side, you have what might be a holistic attractor, which is actually part of so the transition is a whole systems transition, including all three of those different components to its associated transition, as well as a cultural transition and a shift in the actual human beings that are moving into that new context.

Int 59:13  
Okay, fascinating. So you do have a kind of post capitalist narrative that you're because you're really kind of describing a, a vision in which people are holistic, and it's much more cooperative. It's much more coherent, you could say. And it's going to be less intensely based on exploitation and competition. Is that fair to say?

Jordan 59:40  
Yeah, and I'd say this Brooklyn positive and negative direction, which is that the negative direction is that all other scenarios are an extremely self terminating in a relatively short time. So if you kind of look at it in terms of a possibility space that future paths, the basic pruning rules, prune all those paths away. So the only available paths are past that had to look like what you're just describing. And then from a positive direction, there are very strong reasons to believe that a these are very well within the domain of what human beings can be human nature. We're not talking about changing human nature, we're just talking about shifting the state variables within the face space of human nature. And that there is a direct collaboration between cultural and socio technical constructs that are in alignment with that same set of human states. So they are mutually co evolving. And then finally, the most positive, the best news is that and this happens to be fundamentally the most fully optimized for maximum intelligence that can be achieved in principle. So it's the way you actually win the intelligence game. 

Int 1:00:47  
Okay, that's fascinating, but I'm definitely gonna have to just sleep on that. But that's really, really interesting. So, in your view, what if one is attracted to that picture that you just painted, you know, what is the constructive available pathways to living breathing human beings today that you think can accelerate the transition into that to that state? 

Jordan 1:01:15  
Hmm. There's actually many. So I've noticed at least kind of three basic domains that the people seem to be entering into. And this is not in any particular order, but I'll just sort of start my mind can't help but organize things along some framework. The first is at the individual level. So, as I mentioned, the context in which we have developed differentially for different people obviously gives rise to a certain individuation a certain level or kind of sovereignty.
In order to be able to actually play the new game, you have to upgrade your capacities. Usually almost everyone, I've never met anyone who hasn't had to upgrade their capacities. And I've never met anyone who's sort of so fully upgraded, that they're sort of ready to play all the way. Like we're all kind of still working really hard to basically be able to play some of the time. Although I have different people who are quite differentials. So this includes things like really rather studiously addressing any form of developmental or emotional traumas that are short circuiting your capacity to participate in a fully sovereign fashion. You know, if you have triggers or defense mechanisms, fix the hangups. Yeah, yeah. And these are this is real work. This is non trivial. Sure, yeah. Secondarily, and this is, by the way, usually in this order, because the second one is going to be your cognitive frameworks. Your With I think his name's Jonathan hate. Sure, yeah. So the elephant and the writer metaphor. That's right. Don't take your cognitive frameworks too seriously, you'll find that if you shift certain emotional traumas, things that seems so obviously true and in our Gribble fade like Miss because at the end of the day, our cognitive frameworks are sitting on top of an emotional psychological framework or a foundation and shifts at the base level implies shifts at the surface level. Which is not to say, by the way that you see, geometry turns out to be false if you learn how to solve your problems with attachment. But for example, economics will shift for you for sure. And you'll actually be able to vastly more fluidly be able to load and unload different frameworks and be able to use tools as tools, as opposed to use them as paradigms or as ideologies. 
And so particularly shifting away from any that is attracted to an ideological mindset, which of course, is just an externalized version of reason, acting as defense mechanism. So personal, that's all very powerful. The second is then relational. But I mean this, again, kind of in the same order, which is really begin to become increasingly skillful of understanding precisely how you go about entering into relationships with other people at axia body level, Where exactly are your various body hang ups, emotional traumas, psychological frameworks, bad habits, driving, and where you actually entering into skillful relationship, which is at least at the level that you would like it to be when you're considering it thoughtfully. And then begin to get better at it. So practice that and practice doing things like having very high integrity, and the ability to communicate clearly. And the ability to listen well. You know, basic communications protocol cleanliness, Because this is the basic framework. So the material out of which this future system is based, is made up of human beings who've achieved a certain level of sovereignty over themselves and have achieved a capacity to enter into skillful relationships with each other on the basis of integrity and high quality communication. And this, by the way, is principled I can I can actually describe almost at a mathematical level why that is the basis of the maximum possible collaborative intelligence.

Int 1:05:34  
Now, that's all very well, but I'm thinking though, that there has to be something else because everything you just said could be used to describe a lot of, you know, blue church operatives, right. 

Jordan 1:05:46  
Oh, heavens, no, no, no, you don't think that there you could fulfill the criteria that you just laid out. And be I would say that if you are currently alive today, and you are still a blue church operative, you are strictly delusional.

Int 1:06:04  
And what portion of the population would you estimate that to be though quite high, right?

Jordan 1:06:09  
Oh, yes, most 85%. Well, of people who live in the West, probably on the order of 95%.

Int 1:06:18  
Right. So, are you saying that in your model, the more people do all of those things you just described, intrinsically, the more the the the social system will transition to the alternative, post capitalist state? Is that your view? That is true. Yes. So my question or there are other things that if maybe, if we talked about the might make a little bit more clear.

Jordan 1:06:44  
Okay. All I was going to say was that one could imagine people doing all of those things. And currently existing blue church institutions will you know, happily integrate those Those human updates as better workers, you know, in my experience, the answer is very much the opposite. Okay. You may be able to run a simulation. In fact, I would recommend that you do if you continue decided to stay employed said the blue church, which increasing you don't need you but to degree which you do run an emulator where you are showing up as a blue church functionary, but I would say with a very high degree of confidence, like here like 93%, that the blue church will absolutely not have any desire capacity or even willingness to integrate a individual who's beginning to move in the process of sovereignty.

Int 1:07:36  
Yeah, you know, it's funny you say that you are, I'm actually right now in the process of getting starting to get into trouble. I'm not even really doing anything that extreme at all. It's like, just from doing these live streams and just kind of speaking casually. I already have like a ethics investigation on ya know, I'm, Yeah, seriously. And so it's like, I guess I see what you're saying that Like, although the criteria that you described are relatively straightforward, you know, be honest, work your shut out. To the degree you actually do those things. It's so relatively rare that you actually quite you do become intrinsically a kind of problem for blue church status quo institutions, is that what you mean?

Jordan 1:08:18  
Yeah, absolutely. There's no question. There's almost nothing more dangerous. And even though the individuals to human beings who are involved may have a different set of like, evaluations of what that means the institutional structure will intrinsically receive it as an infection, or an opportunity for exploitation. So you might find yourself shunted into like a Google X or a darker kind of a place where you can be exploited as a game be resource node. But you're intrinsically corrosive to the structures of particular of late stage blue church, you might you might still be able to fit into kind of like a high tech startup companies. A co founder. But even then you will probably find that within a very short amount of time, the entire team will be like, Fuck, I don't want to take VC money and go public. But that's the stupidest thing imaginable, we should just do an Ico and stay flat and just be the tenebrous. Right? And that's just showing up right? This is just this is as people are beginning to realize that you can't actually play the game at the right level in the context of anything that is vaguely the blue church structure. You get people beginning to try to figure out how to how do I play a new game. And that's the third piece. So the first is become a person. The second is become skillful in forming these relationships and communications protocols. Then the third is in fact, through a combination of, of discernment, and curiosity. Begin to actually form the new kinds of collective intelligence. start having the right conversations, listen to the right people. Listen to who's good orienting you to the right people, and then begin to sense in yourself building your own level of personal intelligence in a much larger way. Because you've done the work. What are the right kinds of relationships? How do I begin to move in in more generative directions for myself, that happened to be intrinsically Win win? How do I find out ways to do that?

Int 1:10:21  
Okay, yeah, that's fascinating. And, I mean, I think implicitly, I'm very much living through precisely this kind of model that that you're describing, obviously, not in the language that you're using, because I've only, you know, come across your work recently. But it just saw how it is just kind of interesting. It just so happens that in my actual moment in my life, I'm really at the brink of a serious kind of strategic reflection on on these matters. And so, I'm not just, you know, talking about myself for the selfish reasons of, you know, wanting to talk about myself, but I'm actually not a bad example to kind of use to work out some of these ideas because Cuz, you know, one question that immediately comes to my comes to my mind is like so right now. I mean, I'm burning a lot of brainpower thinking about how long I'm going to be able to stay in academia. I mean, I have a problem. I'm basically tenured already. I'm the British version of 10 years. So I could stay here as long as I want. I could be and I probably unless I did something really bad, or this ethics investigation were to get like really out of hand somehow. It'd be hard for them to fire me, I think. But I'm, I'm really starting to think like, how long should I really stay in here? Like, in other words, I'm thinking about jumping ship. 
I don't know exactly for what I think I could probably do some sort of, I could probably do a bunch of things, whatever. without talking about that too much. I'm thinking about jumping ship. And it's a very interesting kind of case study for that. What you said about discernment, you know, because how does one How does one discern when one is making a good intelligent, ethically online And decision to defect from status quo institutions. How does one discern that from just being lazy and not being able to hack it and quitting because it's too hard? Do you know what I mean? That's a hard. That's a question of discernment that I think a lot of people struggle with. And it's kind of the one I'm struggling with at the moment, because I'm sort of like, I'm slow to quit academia, because I'm a little proud, you know, like, I don't want to feel like I'm quitting. I don't want to feel like I can't handle it. And I have a I have a strong, you know, tolerance for pain and suffering. I'm a Catholic. And so I'm kind of like sticking out, just stick it out. Don't be Don't be lazy. Don't quit, but then I'm like, No, actually, it's, it would be better in every way for me to like, ditch these chains, and just go full blast on blogging, doing this kind of stuff and whatever, and then just find another way to make money. If I want to be an intellectual that is, you know, so I have for myself, for me that didn't answer that question. I start with that same question, when I began this journey. This is language that I haven't refined in a long time. So it's a little bit rough. But if you would like I'll share it with you. Sure, please. 
So, and you, you usually were Catholic reminded me of it. So I've noticed, at least I noticed in my life that there seemed to be two very distinct ways of going about trying to make that kind of distinction, that that kind of choice, that question of discernment, well, one are called judgment, the other one called discernment, just to put given different names. So judgment appears to me to be something along the lines of endeavoring to engage in an analytical process against some kind of schema and located choice inside that schema. So a simple one might be something like don't touch hot things. So then all you have to do is you have to engage an assessment of the environment. And when you identify something as hot you access the schema, the schema has a very simple rule, don't touch hot things. Is this thing hot? Yes, therefore don't touch. So you're able to run a very effective code that has states and it has actions associated with those states. And your job is only to be able to with high fidelity, evaluate states and apply actions. I might call this a moral schema. Okay? Hence the reference to Catholicism. Now you run into conundrums in this place, where either the state is difficult to identify, because if you have a very large number of distinct states that are perhaps entering into relationships that are paradoxical, they lead to different conclusions of what actions should be taken, or is in fact novel that the schema doesn't include anything that is like this. And if your mind has been if your choice making has been constructed around, optimizing for these kinds of schemas, You may find yourself quite challenged in dealing with truly novel situations become optimized for computation in moral space. But you haven't learned how to actually address you've kind of ameliorated the ambient skill of dealing with novelty. This, by the way, is something that happens in evolutionary theory, a lot like organisms that are optimized for what's called hill climbing, right? traps, evolutionary traps. This is a sort of an evolutionary trap and a moral schema. The other kind has to do with with essentially generating rock capacity to make good choices in an arbitrarily larger number of diverse context. So bizarrely enough, the answer to the question in a second category is something well, let's put it this way. In the first category, a good choice is something like a choice that accurately assesses what's going on in reality, and welcome deploys the right schema. In the second category, a good choices, the kind of choice that a good person makes. So it's to be able to do this kind of discernment actually means become a good person, which means things like, build embodied wisdom.
You know, put yourself into places where you actually make hard choices. So you have a sense of what it feels like to make a good choice in the context of hard choices. become very aware of how your total sensory modalities go about actually making sense of your total environment. If you find that you tend to bias towards analytic methodologies. Notice where you're maybe not listening to what would be called say your gut, which is a non trivial information processing mechanism associated with somatic survival for billions of years, much older than your rational neocortex. Notice where you find yourself engaging in self tyranny where you don't ask Allow yourself to be in personal integrity where all the different aspects of yourself are able to speak their particular perspectives openly and honestly and are listened to completely before decisions are made. Because if you don't do that, then if you make a choice, the parts of you that weren't listened to, will be resentful. And they will tend to take it out on you post facto. So this is so so the second case is about building character, and building capacity to become skillful and choice making in its raw sense. And of course, as you do that, you will notice that you become less than less concerned with the quality of the choices that you're making, because you're just really good at that as a fundamental capacity. Now, let me just embed that in a larger narrative.
When this when the environment is relatively static, the former kind of approach can actually be more effective than the latter cut. Like I said, if the universe consists only of objects that are hot and objects that are not hot, and only touch and not touch The schema don't touch hot things is actually very, very efficient. If you optimize for that you can kick ass, right?
However, as the complexity of the environment grows, and particularly as the novelty in the environment grows, if the environment is changing, then categorically the second approach is more adaptive.

Jordan 1:18:19  
Right? That's interesting. Yeah. I never really thought about that. Exactly. But you could kind of advance the proposition that with the acceleration of social and technological life, that actually increases the payoffs to a strategy based on strong character. Yep. That's interesting question. Yeah, that's interesting. This is actually another way of saying the basic story that I've been telling throughout this conversation, that once you grasp what that means, and sort of extrapolate it in terms of its individual and relational and social consequences, you've identified what the singularity attractor is in terms of maximum intelligence.

Int 1:18:56  
That's fascinating and and also I should add useful for my own decision making, so thank you for that. Jordan. So are you operating on a kind of model? are you imagining a model of the social scale? That's a kind of threshold model like you imagine when this stuff becomes sufficiently popular, you'll see cascades of this kind of behavior and and that would so that the face transition would be kind of slow and slow and then all of a sudden abrupt in a kind of cascade dynamic. Is that how you imagined it or no?

Jordan 1:19:55  
I have my priors have their highest confidence on that model, yet not catastrophic. We may be in the order of like 60-63%. Okay. Yeah, quite, quite, potentially quite diverse, like different areas may flip at different rates. So you might see a pleiotropic effect where say China may hold on to its own China's, while other areas of the world are teleporting into this news place more rapidly, right? Yeah, and you can imagine even subspaces within societies having their own kind of local local dynamics. Yeah, I would expect that actually.

Int 1:20:05  
Right. Right. Yeah, that's really good. That's really good. Um, so, do you have a sense for you gave very good kind of you gave a very interesting, general advice for how people should think about navigating these sorts of things. Do you have I'm just curious if you might not, but do you have any other kind of thoughts on how people should decide how to kind of allocate their their risk portfolio in this regard, you know, and that is, you know, for any for any given person in a particular occupation in a particular sector in a particular country. You know, there are obviously different strategic variables for how much you can afford to, you know, speak the truth, boldly. Right. And I think this is something that people are really thinking through right now and people are trying Think because I think it's very clear to many people that our world, our social world is become filled with all kinds of lies really, I mean, the just the disingenuousness that holds together contemporary kind of Western society. There's so many little polite lies that I think it's quite suffocating from for many people, right? It's a word, we're far from the only ones I think, and so a lot of people are planning, you know, some sort or strategizing some sort of way of, of navigating themselves personally to this type of other sort of equilibrium. But there are different in difficult kind of strategic calculations right, like some people might, it might be well advised for some people to make that defection, but for other people, you know, actually, it's maybe not a great time. Or maybe this isn't the case. Maybe there is a categorical directive here where like everyone should do it to the maximum of their of their willpower to the maximum their character is able to sustain. This is a kind of categorical.

Jordan 1:22:01  
Well, I think you've just defined a very nice categorical directive because you also made it bespoke. And I've actually been using recently something along the lines of, I think, either Buddhist or Hindu concept of Dharma here. And you can map it to a more mechanistic model if you'd like. But it's something along the lines of what well, I'll just say I found and I've actually found this that many other people who have spoken with have shared that this was sort of Eunice like you. You are something you're not arbitrary, and you're not generic. And so, first is a really strong sense of humility, and self honesty. Which gives rise to the ability to then feel Eunice the most clearly and then endeavor to make the choices That are both fully in alignment with who you actually are. I would say that the biggest traps that I've noticed are actually trapped that are happening at the cognitive level. Because right now, for example, we're speaking at the cognitive level. And so already, this might be perceived, and it might be conceived and it might be acted upon in the context of being a, an injunction from a top down cognitive perspective, which is to say, an ideology. And so I find many, many people are caught of that. So what they end up doing is they think to themselves, well, I ought to X, Y, or Z, a good person would X, Y, or Z. They're endeavoring to actually simulate character inside the context of a schema. And so that I think would be the first thing to break with is to actually just break with that entirely. And make a distinction made between what some people would call your construct itself and your your essentially your authentic self and try to reach a place if you melody and self honesty, there's actually able to accept the reality of your authentic self, in its innocence, and in its richness. And then they get to make choices that are most fully in alignment with that authentic self. Because I can tell you for sure, life is insanely more pleasant and meaningful, even when it sucks. It is hard. If you're making choices along on that basis, and then in that context, then you can start doing strategy. Because then you're actually you're making strategy, you're making the choices, you're making strategic choices for the right reasons. But if you do strategy first, you can trouble.

Int 1:24:34  
So you're actually saying that people should, in the kind of current world that we're all trying to navigate right now you think the the optimal strategy is to first with the kind of reckless disregard to strategy first, just figure out who you are and do whatever you need to do following your gut to align yourself with an environment that that maximally kind of reflects who you are, do that. Do that. 

Jordan 1:25:00
Without strategic reflection in a first phase, and then from there, make your strategic wagers willing to clarify if what you mean by that is to say that people should make a bad strategic decision first, which is to say, you know, quit the job, abandon their family leave their context and go seek find themselves. That's actually a strategic decision. In the context of them being a, find out who you are decision. What I'm saying is okay, to the degree to which you can avoid making important decisions, while getting clarity on your authentic self and separating yourself from your constructed environment and enter your destructive environments. If you're in toxic relationships, it becomes very easy, okay, exit toxic relationships. If you're in a job that is causing an enormous amount of stress, and monopolizing all your time, okay, you're gonna have to get out of that. So you can make kind of like this progressive low hanging fruit frees up more space to be able to achieve a higher level of clarity on who you are because you can get rid of nonsense that is just nonsense. And then on that basis, you're now able to make better choices about the next step and use that better choices about the next step, step by step, and work your way up, but always focusing on Okay, what's in the way right now that I can just get out of the way? Am I currently addicted to crack? Well, okay, it stopped being addicted to crack because that's just an obviously good choice. And on the basis of no longer which may be hard, by the way, it's not trivial to get out of it. It's a good easy choice hard to do, once you stopped Well, okay, now, what's the next step? Cool. I can I can actually get a sense of that I don't think that my authentic self is an addict. And you can kind of move forward that's kind of that's the way of thinking about is that you have a maybe a meta strategy, which is on the basis of taking steps that is the most lucid and clear step in the orientation of increasing the quality of the basis of making choices that you are able to make, and then not making more strategic commitments because The person you are now is shitty at doing long term strategic commitments. But the person you will be if you start doing this will get better and better at it. And that as you get more clear, then you're able to make better strategic choices. And by the way, also have better relationships with better people who can support you making those choices. And you may very well find that many of the things that had seemed very problematic, had in fact, evaporator of their own accord.

Int 1:27:20  
Hmm, fascinating. Yeah, that's, that's really good. If you don't mind, maybe we'll switch gears a little bit. I'll ask you just a few more questions that may or may not be related to all of this. That was really useful, though. And I'm, as I said, is strangely kind of personally useful. So I'm grateful to Jordan. do you what do you think about contemporary kind of party politics in the West, looking around at politicians and stuff like that? Do you Is there anyone in particular that you think or project in particular, that you're kind of like this, that, you know, these people get it better than other people like a political party? Yeah. Or do you think they're all kind of equally in different symmetrical ways, or do you think that you know, for instance, Like, they're all these efforts to kind of what I would what I would call kind of update the blue church to use your language. You know, I see kind of like the democratic socialists of America and and that kind of group, you know, the the kind of the radical left wing of the Democratic Party. You know, there's a lot of interest right now in somehow kind of trying to update these mainstream modern blue church institutions in a way that's more democratic and, and even possibly socialist. Do you think that is promising at all or interesting at all? Or do you think that's a blind alley?

Jordan 1:28:30  
Yeah, I would say that's a blind alley. I think that there's, there's some interesting stuff that happened in the five star movement and in the in the previous iteration of the various pirate parties that had actually a sense of coming from the future. But I think it's a kind of a rule of thumb, that to the degree to which you're going to be living in the future. Using frameworks that come from a very long distance in the past. Maybe you can kind of extract some essential elements from them. like, Okay, take a look at democratic socialism, try to see, okay, what was the thing that actually made that interesting in its context? And really extract out the essence of it in its most pure form, and it's okay. Now, if I took that essence and redeployed without any consideration of say, mechanics, mechanisms, aesthetics, what would that look like now? Okay, well, that might actually be very interesting. But I'm imagining that you can use a 19th century steam engine to fly a Mars lander seems like a pretty obvious bad choice.

Int 1:29:32  
Right? And what do you see Trump as kind of a similar blind alley, or do you find interesting possibilities in that milou?

Jordan 1:29:44  
Well, this is a mapping issue. If you identify Trump as a mapping to political party, then that's a blind ballot. And it might be I don't really know I don't it's been I had an extra number actually. Physically visited any of these particular groups that don't know what's really happening inside? If you consider Trump to be a consequence, a relatively predictable consequence of the collapse of the blue church in the context of the shifts that are going on, then it serves serve two distinct goods, one good is shifting, or ending the life of the blue church as rapidly as possible, which, as I said, the drowning in the metaphor of the drowning person, you need to kind of move them to a place where they're no longer flailing about. And then secondarily forcing, Now unfortunately, oftentimes forcing people in a situation of distress which is problematic and that's very problematic, but forcing people to begin the process of as you say, jumping ship and beginning to say, Okay, well, shit, something new has to happen. How do I begin exploring this novel space and figuring out how to do something, which is at least somewhat adapted to the context I find myself Which is it, you know, that's generically quite good, not to the degree to which people are acting out of dis dis dismay, they are going to the lower registers of the limbic system as their orienting basis, then the net results will be what they have always been when that is the orienting basis, which is terrible. So, okay, avoid that, but Well, I guess that's all I have to say about that.

Int 1:31:29  
Yeah. Okay. That's, but that's interesting. So what one of my listeners, who's actually the person who recommended me to talk to you, he told me that you once said that collapses over, right? And he was very curious to know what you meant by that. Oh, remember when he said that? Could you unpack that?

Jordan 1:31:47  
I can unpack it. And I don't remember when I said it, but it sounds like something I would say. Okay. It just goes back to that very first part of the story, which is, under ordinary circumstances, any one of the specific areas areas of the world where the experts know that the risk is a lot higher higher than people know, would be enough to deliver on some kind of crisis. So we're facing an end dimensional set of crises, any one of which would have been the big deal under any sort of almost a decade over the past 200 years. And so, by most reckonings should have hit the fan A while ago. It's actually a testament to the durability of the social body and to the legacy effectiveness that the various blue church and other kinds of collective intelligences in the context of the larger scale collective intelligence is that that hasn't happened. But we're sort of way out over our skis in terms of things falling apart. And so and I guess, a very concrete way of looking at this. I think this is actually the very specific path that got me to this conclusion was if you just don't The financial, which is a nice kind of quantitative thing. And you take a look at step by step at each of the various elements that were done to address the financial crisis in 2008. And in the European financial crisis, which you noticed was kind of like heroin, for a broken leg. 
Right, there was an external ization of the signaling function that we were in crisis. So we traded, feeling good about what was going on in exchange for actually addressing the underlying problem. And this just externalize the damage to other locations that destroys damage, for example, into the socio political environment. And if you want to do the tracing of Brexit and Trump, it's not hard to say, oh, it happened somewhere around 2010 when it was obvious that the financial crisis have been externalized into the socio political domain. And so, you know, it's kind of like if you've got a binding of a bunch of ropes that are bound together, they're holding a heavy weight, and one of the ropes begins to fray or what happens is the weight shifts to other ropes And even that one group is not actually holding this weight, but at the cost of other, the net net, having less resilience against the weight that is holding. So the likelihood that one of the other ropes beginning to France just gone up the probability of another rope. But as that begins to fray, the weight shifts a little bit and this and that rope has less tension, it shifts its tension, but puts more weight on sphere groups. And so what ends up happening is you get some kind of you're getting a positive feedback loop, where there is a finite time with the whole thing, pops and the open questions. Okay, well, where? How deep does the crisis go? So you can have like a lightweight crisis. We've had many of those and in lots of different domains, you know, say just say, for example, the, the crisis of the collapse of the classified ads industry. And we had that as a real crisis and the point of view of the classified ads people that was a terrible crisis, from the point of view of the newspaper industry, it was immediate. So crisis, from the point of view, the global economy didn't matter at all right? So you can have micro crises. This is a really good Because they clear out, you know, underbrush and kind of shift things forward without causing bigger things to happen. But the longer the more you delay a crisis and externalize the consequences into the broader system, the bigger the consequences will have to be to actually resolve the tension is pent up in it. So that's what I mean by that is that what we've done is we've made a choice to guarantee that things are bigger and deeper when they finally do move significantly.

Int 1:35:26  
Right. Okay. And so the current moment of cultural political change that we're going through right now, which I you know, the major reference points of which would be right Brexit, Trump, and I think more generally, the, the kind of backlash against political correctness that's going on right now. I see very much associated with these, these major political moments. If it's fair to kind of cluster those three things as representative of a kind of contemporary, you know, piece of the Breaking in your in your metaphor. Yeah, do you and I think that's consistent with some of the stuff I read that you wrote about the rise of the red church. 

Jordan 1:36:05
I think that's fairly consistent with how you see it not to reduce red religion.

Int 1:36:12  
Oh, right. Sorry, the red religion. If this is an accurate way to say it, would you say that this current, you know, moment of the of the rope coming apart? Is that? Do you see it as a mini crisis a moderate crisis? Or is this a kind of major world historical moment in your app if you had to guess when you say the Caribbean at the political level?

Jordan 1:36:36  
I was saying specifically the the cluster of things that we could maybe a crisis Trump and yeah, Dino Dino, primarily by Brexit from domain and the current kind of Jordan Peterson qulet. Kind of like a little flowering of anti political correctness. Intellectual breathing space that's opening. It's somebody you know me also and you also and and you know, people that this This kind of stuff, I think it's reasonable to see it as, as one kind of package of the moment. Yeah, I would say the answer is yes. I'd say that we're somewhere in the domain in terms of measuring a pox of world historical, maybe the level of the enlightenment.

Int 1:37:16  
You think that's what this is?

Jordan 1:37:17  
Yeah. And but I in the context of what I think we're actually the largest story that we're in, I don't think that's actually really significant. I'm, I'm on record. So it's easy for me to say, I'm on record as saying that I would be rather surprised if this transition was not at a 1000 year like the rise of Western civilization out of the collapse of classical civilization, or at the 10,000 year mark, which is to say the rise of civilization out of nomadic band level constructs. It seems rather obvious that has to be the case to me at least. So in that context, and enlightenment level shift coming up is kind of Not that not that surprising.

Int 1:38:01  
I see what you mean. Okay, so it's not as grand as it as it might sound at first glance, okay, right. Yeah. 

Jordan 1:38:10
So if you're looking at it from the point of view of say 1999 it should be holy shit, that's a big deal like things are definitely bigger than than they were for looking at from the point of say 2030 is going to be a minor piece of the story from my perspective. Although yeah, hopefully very important, ya know that that the sense of scale and the comparison is very relevant makes makes a lot of sense to me. So I now I'm now going to kind of try to wrap this up with some questions that are coming from the public chat that's actually watching and listening to us right now. Let's put up if you're cool with that, if you're cool with some random questions, one is about your favorite books. What what are you what what books would you recommend to people right now that you think are most worth reading, maybe you could give three if you can pick up three of those actually. If you want to learn if You want to get more there's actually two places you can go to get a list of the books that I recommend.
Nice. One is a comment on my YouTube channel. And the other is one of my medium posts in a collection called practical imagination. But I will give three. Okay, let me see. Well, one of my standby favorites is a 1994 book by Manuel de Landa called Warren the age of intelligent, intelligent machines. I'd recommend that I guess I'll go keep those dramatic. So I'll keep them kind of in the same zone. I would also recommend the book Damon by Daniel Suarez, which is a science fiction book. And that third one will be a good third book in that context. Oh, Man's Search for Meaning. Okay.

Int 1:40:02  
I know of the first one and the third one. I've never heard of the second one. So you learn something new every day. What do you think of Vinay Gupta, who I don't know, but someone in the chat wants to know what you think about him if you've known about him?

Jordan 1:40:16  
I mean, all I know is I know about him. I've never actually spent time with him. Okay. And his reputation is sort of universal, he's sort like that same reputation. I've interact with him very briefly, and it seems to be about right.

Int 1:40:31  
Okay. All right. Cool. Um, I noticed I was also looking through your YouTube channel. I was curious, do you have what are your plans for the YouTube channel? I think you should do live streams there.

Jordan 1:40:42  
I don't have any notion of a live stream, it's rather interesting. I do not currently have any plans for my YouTube channel. Okay. I actually never had any plans for my YouTube channel. I just began doing it and responding to what was happening. I noticed that I haven't shot any videos in a long time. So it may be that I have lost in And that sort of thing. Fair enough. Oh, but here's something I learned that was I thought was very amusing. It makes sense retro actively. But it appears that at least some fraction of the population really deeply believes that the only reason to create a YouTube channel is to get on the Joe Rogan show.

Int 1:41:14  
How did you learn that? What do you mean?

Jordan 1:41:16  
A number of comments, have taken it as almost axiomatic that are confusing as to - well, you've created a YouTube channel, and it seems to have some high quality content. It is confusing as to why you're not on the Joe Rogan show. Like obviously, that must be why you did it. And it seems like you should be able to so why hasn't it happened? I can say categorically that I did not and I have never intended to get on the Joe Rogan show or the Dave Rubin show, though both gentlemen seemed very pleasant. And I certainly would not. 
Well, no, actually after listening, I got pointed to the Elon Musk interview with Joe Rogan. And after that, I would participate in a conversation with Joe. But I don't have any particular aspirations to that kind of thing. So I created a YouTube channel really, honestly, really because I kept getting requests from people to explain certain things to them. And so I figured to be more efficient. I just kind of like explained it a general purpose format, I could just send them the link. And it has definitely served that purpose.

Int 1:42:20  
Okay, yeah. Fair enough. 

Jordan 1:42:22
Yeah, people really don't understand the magic of contemporary communication technology and people are constantly missing missing the point, I think like people are always imagining, if you want to do YouTube or you want to do any of the write a blog or whatever, people are always imagining there has to be some sort of, like, strict like ulterior motive that has something to do with, well, it's like always referring back to the blue church, right? It's always this people always have this deeply ingrained tendency to refer themselves back to whatever represents kind of like power at the center of the spectacle, but you know, where attention is where other people are looking, but I mean, it's missing precisely the point, which is precisely that now is the time to disconnect your attention from where everyone else is looking and simply look around you to whatever is most immediately interesting and attractive and valuable to you that's immediately available to you. Because there's millions of people and ideas and projects and texts and everything that's actually within your reach that you can get to work on immediately and right after it and do that, and before you know it, you're on all of these interesting vectors. And before you know it, you're the next fucking Joe Rogan. And he's an old man, and no one cares about him anymore.

Int 1:43:35  
Yes, that's very well said. I agree.

Jordan 1:43:37  
Yeah. So I mean, I think that it's a shame because we were talking before about, like, evolutionary traps and or just traps and pitfalls in particular. And in general, you were talking about at a certain point in the conversation previously, and I think this is this is a real major one. And I don't know if you're familiar with the kind of like, left wing critiques of what they call the Society of the spectacle. You know, it's this kind of, like, sort of Guys that 1970s Yeah, exactly the, you know, 19 situationist French French people basically Yeah, kind of posting the bars. What's that? Gabbard? Yeah exactly. Geeta bar. Yeah, the situation. And I read that back in the day.

Int 1:44:14  
Yeah, exactly. Um, but the one kernel that I really took from all of that, I think you see very clearly in this conversation we're having right now, which is people do really just overly refer themselves back to, to what they imagine other people are thinking and what they care about, and it really prevents them from doing a lot of so much that they could do immediately.

Jordan 1:44:37  
Yeah, and it kind of sucks to sort of like you're not feeding yourself you're not you know, you're not getting as it's funny I can imagine so like it just didn't do it very simple. Imagine if you chose to eat based upon what you think you thought other people wanted to eat. is such an obviously silly thing to do. But I get it. I mean, we've been trained from child birth but shortly after birth to be unbelievably tuned to this notion of broadcast asymmetric collective attention. So it's visceral, it's hard to train yourself, you have to be conscious, you have to consciously train yourself off of it. You can't just or you might just get lucky and hat and just have not been on that train. But it's pretty rare.

Int 1:45:19  
Yeah, for sure. Well, I think that I think that things are becoming so in so flattened, and they're going to continue becoming so flattened, that I think you'll see more and more people doing all kinds of stuff like this and just for their own sustenance, you know, for the immediate intrinsic value that it brings to their life. And before you know it, you know, they're like, in some sense, the Joe Rogan, like someone like Joe Rogan is a kind of what happens when you take the blue church down a notch, you know, so it's like, you used to have like one Walter Cronkite, right, and then right back that gets decimated into like, you know, 2000 a Walter Cronkite's that are at a little bit of a lower level, but these things happen over Right. So, you know, like Joe Rogan is a Walter Cronkite for a particular slice of the personality profiles of the population. And then all of the other people will kind of add his level of fame or attention are just a bunch of mini Cronkite's, but every passing year, the number of those Cronkite's is going to get, you know, increased at a lower and lower flatter level, I think. And I think where it's ultimately going is people are going to be doing this just for their own purposes in their own groups, for its own intrinsic benefits and values. And it's not going to be this like media fame game where people are, like, right now people think about these things as like, oh, who's got more followers who's like making more money off of it, who's, who's winning the game, who's at the top of the pyramid, but people like the precisely what we're talking about is that that pyramid is going away. It's rapidly being flattened in every passing year, who has the most followers matters less and less and what really matters is like, how effective is the intelligence, community or structure institution that you have operating around you just for its own intrinsic purposes. That's that's how I see it. I think that's consistent with what with your view white?

Jordan 1:47:07  
Yeah. Yes. And then I'm the only thing I would say is that it's to me there's kind of an inside and outside correlation. One is from the inside perspective, that is actually the thing that feels the best. Yeah, there's like the distinction between having 10,000 Facebook friends and having 10 friends. Yeah. But second is again, I strongly believe this also tends to be is exactly isomorphic with the collective intelligence topology that is maximum, maximum intelligence. Yes. So it's fun. Like it's actually by playing this new game this game be. You simultaneously get to live the more most fulfilling and meaningful life and also happened to be perfectly deployed, your personal energy is fully participating in that which will ultimately would ultimately be the best possible we're constructing a collective intelligence just to say the thing that is the maximally intelligent place to be.

Int 1:48:05  
Right. I like that. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah. Um, I don't want to keep you too long. I know. We've been talking for quite a while maybe if it's okay with you. I'll ask you just one more question. Is that cool? That sounds perfect. Yeah. All right. Great. Um, maybe I'll make this last question about blockchain. I think from what I gather you're you're rather bullish on on blockchain. Do you see it as how should I put this?  Do you think people kind of underestimate its significance or do you think people kind of overestimate its significance? Hmm. Or you don't have to? I mean, you could just tell me why you think blockchain is interesting.

Jordan 1:48:49  
Oh no, no, I want to give you a good answer, but it's decidedly not trivial. So to do this, right. We have to actually build some constructs. So the first construct is something called seniors. Seniors it's kind of like the genius of the seniors the the emergence of a collective intelligence around some novel capacity or some novel attractor. So punk rock is the seniors quantum mechanics is the seniors, the emergent PC was the seniors. The organic food movement, the seniors, like fill in the blank is lots and lots of things. The second is a self organizing collective intelligence. So this is a particular subset of the seniors where the characteristics of the seniors give rise to a series of feedback loops whereby the collective intelligence has the capacity to maintain or increase its its capacities what it is, by virtue of what it is. So, punk rock had less of a self organizing collective intelligence character than, say, the personal computer. So more people who participated in the PC universe increase the demand for PCs, which increase the economic flows, which increase more people wanting to participate, instead of caused that collective intelligence to expand it had A very flat capacity can only do certain things but you know, we're doing we're doing because that happened. So within that context, when we say blockchain I definitely don't mean the technological innovation of Satoshi that was able to resolve produce a solution to the Byzantine generals problem. I don't really necessarily refer to the siness that that is an aspect up right so if I think if we use punk rock as an example, we might say that say Bitcoin represents, I don't know, the clash or the Sex Pistols and theory m represents the Ramones or something like that, right? So we've got a very different flavor of something which is clearly part of the larger meal you and is currently operating interesting is rules. 
In this case, both Bitcoin and theorem represent a in internally they are self organizing collective intelligences in the broader context of the seniors. So what I am bullish on is that the the senior thesis of the blockchain sometimes also called cryptocurrency, sometimes called the token economy, right? The fact that it has many different names as a good sign has it has a different capacity than the space that is operating in. Most notably,  I'll have to give some caveats but we just cut the part that's good. The optimistic part is that it it still attaches a premium to people who are able to think clearly about very complicated things and communicate with clarity and honesty, those complicated things. So it selects for metallics. It does not select principally does not select for bullshit. Now. Copy All seniors has become almost immediately parasitized by bullshit and the blockchain space is full of bullshit. So the diet you know the struggle is on to see whether or not the potential the blockchain to be a place where clear and very lucid complex thinking about big questions is supported or it dissolves into just a miasma of marketing bullshit, and financial gerrymandering. So it's kind of it's an it's a it's a maybe it's early teenage stage, it's a tween right now. It's about 10 or 11. Okay, very cocky. It's a very cocky teenager tell you what. But the potential that if I if I take, for example, the number of people who are interested in and able to think about the early part of our conversation, the proposition of what would be the characteristics of a man Similarly intelligent collective intelligence. And why would that even be an interesting question to ask? And then I look at the population of the of that the portion of that population that has some of their attention to the blockchain space, it's actually relatively high. 
So, to the degree to which the blockchain space is able to build institutional frameworks to police against parasites and bullshit artists, and select for clear, honest thinking, kind of like to say the way mathematics was able to do that, or science, which differentiates science from magic in the beginning, was its ability to build those kinds of institutional structures and say, Okay, this is pseudoscience and bullshit and this is in fact clear thinking and we have ways of separating those things somewhat rigorously. not perfectly but a hell of a lot better than prior centuries, then the blockchain space as a seniors is able to will be able to realize the potential the liveness genius, and that potential is extremely large and it is entirely possible that we could see a shift of 75% of the global economy into that seniors in a decade. If it had a chip together. quite likely it won't. We may see, we may see zero may just die. that's unlikely. It's just too much potential. And there's too much dysfunction, the legacy technology industry. But the potential is, is is very, very high. And it's still quite right. Like, it's too early to tell exactly whether or not these these subgroups will figure it out. It doesn't take many, it could be like as little as 10 people, if they were able to really, really get a clean structure that was was able to be very effective while maintaining a high integrity institutional framework. Everybody else would begin to emulate that and it would grow organically into a much more powerful collaborative space. 

Int 1:54:52  
Okay, right. That's interesting. Is there a particular kind of social application or kind of social engineering solution that You think blockchain could possibly provide that you're personally most kind of excited about or paying most attention to?

Jordan 1:55:10  
Yeah, the one that I'm actually the most excited about is a new form. So how do I say this? Right? So there's the Yellow Pages. And there's Google. There's the flea market news, eBay. There's first Barnes and Noble and then Walmart and is Amazon. Okay, there is the city. And there's X. X is the thing that I'm most excited about that the blockchain as a seniors can give rise to. 

Int 1:55:45  
Hmm, wow. That's interesting. So it's sort of a question mark that you don't even know what you would call it.

Jordan 1:55:53  
I mean, what I would call, it's going to be bad because I'm not a marketing guy. So I can't name things well, but it We'll be in relationship to the way that we go about organizing our ways of living with each other in space to context, right? That gives rise to the highest quality ways that we actually coordinate our activities together in the generative direction. Right. So it's going to actually resolve the question of how we live and how we develop.

Int 1:56:30  
Hmm. That's very interesting. That's very interesting. I mean, there's so much more I'd love to talk about, but I don't want to overtax you, and we've done a good two hours, man. So this has been really interesting and really edifying. And it's been fun too. So I'm inclined to let you off the hook. Now. I think that sounds good to you.

Jordan 1:56:47  
Yeah. Thank you. It has been a while, I can't wait, my lower back definitely needs some stretching. Well, thank you. I enjoyed this conversation. And I think I'll be chewing on some of the questions and some of the ideas For a while, and I hope that you and the folks who choose to watch it felt like their time was well spent.

Int 1:57:06  
Yeah, people in the chat seemed to be enjoying it. In fact, a few people said a few people watching right now are I think big fans of yours. And they a few people said that they feel like you You kind of broke some ground in this conversation, like saying some things they never saw you right before say before? I don't know if you would, if you would agree with that, but that's interesting.

Jordan 1:57:23  
Oh, it was shocking if it weren't the case. That's always a good time. That's maybe one of the best measures I think of a successful conversation at least along the lines that I'd like to do them. You know, I'm not a fan of like, you know, doing too much rehearsal of that's very Game A, Game B you do it real. He do it in real time, and you always should break some new ground. And if you have a good in your market, or if you have a good conversation, you'll definitely break new ground.

Int 1:57:53  
Definitely. I think you and I are both on the same page and that way, for sure, and that's probably why this was fun. Yeah, the people watching I think I've quite enjoyed it also. So thanks again and we'll stay in touch you know, my lines open if you want to ever follow up on any of these things.

Jordan 1:58:08  
So it's good remember I'm having a baby in a month so I will probably be going awfully dark for maybe even till the end of the year.

Int 1:58:14  
Cool. Well, congratulations to you and yeah, definitely enjoy life with your family and away from the internet for a while.

Jordan 1:58:22  
Good luck making your choices.

Int 1:58:24  
Thanks, man. I appreciate that. And I appreciate I appreciate you sharing your, you know, your insights and having these interesting, especially with respect to my somewhat some of my personally motivated curiosity. So it was interesting to get your take on them. Alright, thanks again. Take it easy.