Boomer 0:07  
How many of us ever know what it is to become the perfect version of ourselves? This is decoding superhuman with your host, Boomer Anderson. Why hello superhumans. It's Boomer Anderson here, your host of this podcast. As always, I'm appreciative that you joined. I really love the fact that you guys listen to this podcast. And I hope to bring a tremendous amount of value to you. Now with this podcast, we generally like to go all the way out to the edges back to the mainstream. Bring on experts to give you bite sized pieces of actionable information for you to use in your everyday life. But before we begin today, I must admit this is a bit of a confession, rather than really bringing on someone to talk about bite sized pieces of actionable information, brought on an expert to talk About a completely new framework for thinking and interacting with the world. The topic today is sovereignty. And I encourage you to listen to the full podcast to get really all the details of what exactly that means. But my guest today is Jordan green Hall. Jordan is a CEO of neuro hacker collective, but he's also in his 17th year of building disruptive technology companies. Jordan graduated from Texas a&m, as well as Harvard Law before beginning is one of the first employees at mp3. com. In 2000. 
Jordan really kick started, or really lead the online digital video revolution as the founder and CEO of devex. After navigating to financial crises, as well as an IPO, Jordan left devex to return his attention to the big picture. He spent a number of years some time at think tanks and Institute's most notably the Aspen Institute as well as the Santa Fe Institute where he served on the Board of Trustees for five years. Jordan joined neuro hacker collective and the co founders Daniel shmotkin burger as well as James Martin burger after being or spending, I should say, a week on an early neuro hacker collective stack, he was convinced about the power and potential of this new technology and join Daniel and James to bring it out to the world. As I mentioned earlier, the topic today is sovereignty. And Jordan really takes us through both why sovereignty is needed to save the world from a potential apocalyptic event, but also the three key elements of sovereignty, how one could really begin to get into a state of sovereignty and exactly what that means and feels like. And then finally, we close out with just sort of me picking Jordan's brain about the key obstacles to sovereignty, talk about how government gets in the way and that really brings up items like blockchain. This conversation was both intellectually challenging as well as fun for me. You'll see at times that I'm both processing and trying to ask questions at the same time. In fact, I took so many notes that I'll try and condense them all into the show notes which can be found at decoding superhuman.com/jordan. Again, I really enjoyed this conversation. I hope you do as well have a great one superhumans.
Our sponsor today is neuro hacker collective not surprising considering the CEOs on the show. I enjoy their products so much that I use them five out of seven days, whether it's quality or quality of mind, which is a new formula that you should all try. I do find them to be completely revolutionary in the supplement world. And I do think it really kind of upgrades me as a person to hopefully reach for this whole concept of sovereignty. Now, if you want to try either quality or quality of mind, go over to neuro hacker calm right now plug in the discount code Boomer and you'll get 10% off your first order or 15% off any subscription order. This is something I've been taking for the past 10 months. And I've noticed a significant upgrade in my overall well being a reduction in anxiety, and just an ability to think clearer throughout the day. Does that sound like value to you? Well, I put a little skin in the game and I invested in their company's recent refund around. So that's how much I believe in the product. Jordan, welcome to the show.

Jordan 4:39  
Thank you. I'm glad to be here.

Boomer 4:40  
So this is a conversation I've looked forward to for a very long time actually because I've had the chance to speak with a couple of people that you're close with being Dan stickler, and James from often burger about this very topic. And the topic today we're going to get into is sovereignty but before That, I have to ask you, because I saw this video and you said that you're excited that Donald Trump got elected. Do you mind if I ask why?

Jordan 5:10  
Alright, so let me preface because by invoking sovereignty, we first have to make a little bit of room, which is, in order to discuss sovereignty to do it right. And well, we actually have to already begin the process of entering into it, if that makes any sense, okay. It's not the kind of thing that you can stand outside of and look at, you have to actually enter into it, one piece of which is becoming is understanding it. And the reason why I mentioned that is that this question of Donald Trump has a particular characteristic of shaking people out of their sovereignty. And if if by virtue of entering into a conversation about Donald Trump, you get shaken out of your sovereignty, then, well, for one thing, you won't be able to actually participate in the conversation. fairpoint great. So now we've got like three or four layers of recursion going So think about that as a primary point that if you want to be able to meaningfully, actually consider anything, and in particular meaningfully, consider precisely those things that are the most challenging to you, which will often show up, although not exclusively show up as controversial in the social middle you, then you must be first and foremost very clear on how your sovereignty relates to the world that you're interacting with. So just keep that in mind appear as we go into this conversation so that you're noticing, as I say things, how does that actually affect your ability to continue to be fully listening to and responding to the conversation? and to what degree do you check out? 
To what degree do you enter into a kind of a coarse grained emotional response? Or to what degree do you begin to enter into a kind of a simplistic schematic of thinking, what you might call judgment or prejudging the First thing that I do, the reason why I can actually say that I was excited by the election of Donald Trump is contextualized. Right? So I'm not saying that from the point of view of being a political partisan on the ground in 2016. I'm contextualizing it, at least two layers, and probably three or four layers larger. So if anybody has spent any time looking at or listening to the kinds of things that I gauge in, I take as a primary object, civilization design, right? So the evolution of civilization, and then the degree to which we can actually engage in a conscious relationship with how civilization unfolds. Alright, already at that point, I've already lost most people, but that's important, which is to recognize that we are, we're embedded in a civilization or embedded in a huge amount of stuff that we more or less just receive that we have very little consciousness. It's actually been a developed, how it came to be, how it relates to us, and How forms our ability to perceive an act of the world. 
And so that's the primary consideration, particularly these days, but one that I urge people to take is to recognize that we're fish and there's water, and that water is mostly of human creation. And therefore, it's kind of like we're playing a game. And we can recognize that as a consequence, we can notice how the game works. And then we can choose to begin considering different games we might want to play all the way down to the basic level, there are certain things that are rock hard, solid, like the laws of physics that we're probably not gonna be able to play around with. But couple of levels higher than that, and it becomes pretty plastic. Okay, so watching and monitoring and observing the shape and flow of the evolution of our civilization. I then notice the event of the 2016 election as one being particularly interesting, meaning that it actually represents a will actually specifically what's called a phase transition. There's something going on there that is profound and important, because it's happening at such a deep level almost completely invisible to almost everyone who is watching it at the wrong level. And and I think that if anybody is sort of if you go back and rewind your mind to the point at which the election happens so if you can maybe in the moment where that that sort of interesting moment where the news, mass media had to begin the process of shifting their narrative from the inevitable Clinton win to will oftentimes unfortunate Trump when something happened at a at an individual and collective level, which I'm going to call entering into a liminal space, people were disoriented. Most people not everyone, but most people. 
Even the people who are Trump supporters were disoriented, they were disoriented in a euphoric direction, but nonetheless, something happened that was confusing the model the framework, the collective intelligence was surprised and it was surprised at such a deep way that it didn't know how to resolve it. Surprise. Now we can run this actually, at this point this this way of framing it is useful because we can actually run a line, which is to say that this, this experience happens at an individual level as human beings, we, on occasion run into circumstances like this, we find ourselves in situations where our ability to make sense of our environment and feel confidently, that we can actually make good choices in our environment gets blown up, and we're just confused, and oftentimes, very quickly, then have some emotional response to our confusion, usually, usually fear, although not always, but that sort of thing happens at a collective level as well. Right? So awesome. Many, many people at that particular moment entered into a state of individual liminality liminal space, and in a collective liminality, or they couldn't even look around to find other people to give them orientation of what was a good framework. I could look at that moment from two perspectives from one perspective, anything that does that anything that generates that sense of individual collective limits. ality is extremely powerful, important because it is in liminality, where we have the necessity and the possibility of the most significant upgrades in our technologies of sovereignty, our capacities for sovereignty. 
It also is, by the way, the most places where we can have the most damage, we can actually make the biggest mistakes, you know, everything has moved now from solid into fluid. And depending on how things play out, it might really solidify into something that was actually not a very good way of doing it. Right. So it's, it's a moment of distinct important. And in this case, it wasn't just a call it a stochastic or random or a just kind of event. But actually it was it was itself a part of something which requires and makes needful the possibility of an increase in sovereignty, meaning we're in the middle of a of a phase shift. We're in the middle of a great transition. The world that developed through the 20th century in front of the world that developed through most of civilizations. And I can kind of do this in stacks, like the 80 years of World War Two, but also the 500 years since the Enlightenment, and also the 2000 years since the beginning of Western civilization, and also the 15,000 years since the beginning of agricultural civilization, like all of those are actually cleaving. And the transition is of that order of magnitude, if not possibly larger. So I'm witnessing at this moment, a thing that is simultaneously generating at mass scale on a global basis, but opening into liminality. 
That is incredibly needful, because it is happening as a consequence of a set of changes that are going on, of such magnitude. And across so many levels, that our ability to respond to it is impossible in the prior framework, all the forms of making sense of our world, all the framework of how we make x take actions of all the technologies of civilization and society are inadequate to the moment That we find ourselves in. And so hopefully, there's a phrase from philosophy that I like, hopefully this event will awaken us from our dogmatic slumber. And in in being awakened from our dogmatic slumber, we will find a way to enter into a new way of being in the world relating to each other and coming into response to the world that is actually adequate to the moment we find ourselves in.

Boomer 13:23  
Okay, so, Jordan, if I understand this correctly, we're in this moment, and we haven't really solidified yet. Right. So we've gone from solid to liquid, I guess first question is, have we really solidified? And then secondly, I think one of the other things that I've heard you say before, is that we're in this transition that could potentially kill us all. What events what technologies do you think could lead to that and how do we avoid it?

Jordan 13:52  
Okay, well, okay, you actually asked two questions, both of which are profound. I'll try to take them in order if I if I lose the thread Just remember the second question and we can come back to it. Okay. Alright, so the first question what's interesting, and again, I find it delightful to understand that it's very painful is that many people endeavored to solidify and to solidify too quickly. So I'll give you an example, a very concrete example. There was an effort after like within the first month after the election to make sense of the event, and to make sense of the event in the most banal way possible, meaning to change as little as possible, the way that you previously made sense of the world and still try to make sense of the event. I think of any number of things. Russian hacking, I think, is the most enduring one. And what's what's interesting is that each of these forming structures you can think of almost like crystals in magma, so there's solidification but they're initially almost like snowflakes funny I didn't. Yeah, they're actually like snowflakes in the physics. He says just say that they're as they're growing. They're building resilience, but individually They're actually still very fragile. The tectonic shifts of the nature of what we're going into continues to break them. So while there has been a two sided effort to close one's eyes and not actually think about what's going on to stay deeply embedded in an in a increasingly dysfunctional, delusional framework of sense making the reality of the circumstances have continued, just break that up. So I find that many people, even those people who most steadfastly endeavor to bury their heads in the sand are just finding that they're being dragged kicking and screaming into having to recognize that, okay, we're just going to have to figure out something's going on that is deeper than just the stories that I can make up. 
And I think that like the entire career arc of the past two years has been a great example of that. Every time a prefab mechanism for endeavoring to heal, the break has come up. It has lasted only, I don't know, days, weeks, maybe months before it's been turned under. It's a nice process where you know, at some point somebody just has to recognize it. That's an unpleasant place to be and step back and say, Okay, oh shit, I don't want to play in that washing machine anymore, what the hell's going on? And I think more and more and more people have made have made that recognition at a at a base level at a physical level really. And then have made the choice to step back and wonder what the hell's going on. And so of course, what happens is that as fewer people participate in the mass delusion, the capacity of the mass delusion to just keep pulling people under weekend so we're actually beginning to accelerate towards having our shit together, which is good news, in spite of the fact that it's very unpleasant right? This is not going to be a pleasant things is going to be deeply deeply distressful thing, as all moments of liminality are okay, did that feel like that was a good response to your first question it did. Moving on to the second one where we have all of these people that are accelerating towards having their shit together, so to speak, and there's a lot of there's potential transition into something greater but there's a lot of things that could screw it up and kill us all. What do you see as some of those potential obstacles, whether it be technology, politicians, people, etc.
So at this point, we've been doing this long enough that it openly went about that request has fence to it, or some, it feels solid. In order to respond well, to the question that you asked. I'm gonna have to actually construct something, which is not simple. And so the request is to actually listen. And I don't mean that mainly, what I mean is actually it's not easy to listen to something which is not simple. But to be curious about what I'm trying to construct and maybe allow it to build up before thinking that it it makes sense, because it won't make sense for a while, I don't think, okay, so because there's a bunch of different pieces that it all kind of fit together. So let's start at just technology. And I think it's not fully obvious, but pretty clear that somewhere in the middle of the 1950s. As a result of the invention of the atomic bomb, the human species entered into a historically novel mode. So prior to somewhere in the middle of the 1950s, try as we might, we couldn't really get up that badly. World War Two was bad. But it barely made a dent in the population of humans on the planet. Even really significant natural events like the Black Death, which were really, really bad, still barely made a dent in the population of humans on the planet. But we couldn't do anything. Suddenly, in the middle of the 1950s. We found ourselves in a circumstance that we could do, we had the possibility for the very first time in the history of the universe, of actually pushing ourselves to extinction, or at least to an edge, it was morally equivalent and functionally equivalent to extinction. 
Really, no species has ever had that circumstance. I mean, so many species have entered into circumstances where their relationship with their niche was one where certain behaviors like they could graze themselves to extinction, or they could certify to a point where they're nutritionally supporting themselves. That's true. We're talking about a situation where a single affirmative choice in the part of two specific individuals could have killed everyone. And that's normal. Right now. What's important after that point is to recognize that why that happened was that we had reached a level of ability, a level of our own power in relationship to the world that itself was unprecedented. We had built a capacity to deliver energy to deliver power into the world. That was new. And we done that because our own ability to invent ways to deliver power had continued to accelerate, we should say science and technology. So we've gone from swords to arrows to guns to Bothwell bombs actually predicted guns but to bigger bombs to bigger bombs and suddenly bombs that were insane and penetrating the deepest recesses the laws of physics to be able to get there. Well, okay, that hasn't stopped. Right, the the the process of our ability to know the world and change the world, because of by virtue of our use of our will, has continued and in fact his continued to accelerate. So in just Make it simple. In 1945, we entered into a new era where we had a capacity to destroy everything. But at a tiny, tiny fraction. 
In this case, the inverse of the problem. In that case, only two people had the possibility of doing that meaningfully the President of the United States the premier of the Soviet Union, but because science and technology have continued to advance, we've kind of continued to fill the gaps. So now we have entered we have the democratization of the technologies of extinction is maybe a way of thinking about it. And it doesn't seem like we've reached that, but just just take nuclear proliferation as a simple example, I went from two to seven. And we're now kind of entering into a moment where the people who are the biggest experts with nuclear proliferation have said, Look, our ability to keep this thing contained is decelerating the likelihood that at some point, we're going to enter into nuclear power in the hands of something which is at a level lower than a great state is pretty likely, and we're going to find somebody Somewhere who's maybe say a multinational corporation has developed nuclear power, maybe in the next 1015 years. And it doesn't have to be. 
It could be a terrorist organization, it could be a rogue state, it doesn't matter. The point is we've entered into a new phase. And that new phase is not just a linear thing. It's just it's one thing to get two to seven people to kind of imbalance, the 30 people is a totally different game. And the game theory starts to unravel pretty quickly. And you can apparently one variable with things like crisper the ability to engage in the construction of genetic and bioengineering is very rapidly and much less controllably going to be entering into the social environment, single digit, millions of people are going to have a level of power that in the 70s was only within the constraints of, you know, two or three would be seven national governments. cyber warfare is also a same order, in an odd way because we are actually binding the fabric of our lives world to a computational substrate cyber technology cyber warfare capacity. is beginning to enter into an existential capability in 1995. If you shut down every computer in the world, who cares? Doesn't matter that much life continues in 2025. It does not. Okay, we could do other ones, I can just keep it keep making them up. Let's try another one. drones, particularly swarms of autonomous, autonomous drones are also beginning to enter into a moment right at the edge of existential. It's not quite there, but it's at the edge. And the reason this zoom in on that because I think it's a way for people to grasp, we have to understand things in the context of how the dynamics reinforce themselves, because it's escape velocity, it's when things get out of hand that we run into trouble. 
So there's a really, really, really good video that was put out on swarms of killer drones I did at the top of mind, I can't name it right now, but maybe afterwards, I could find it and send it to you. I can link to it in the show notes. But the basic premise is it shows a world is extremely feasible, like exist tomorrow, where autonomous little drones I just looked a little quad crop copter does we have have enough AI capability and enough signal awareness capability to engage in targeted assassination. By the way, this could actually happen right now. And I'm surprised, I'm sure it actually does exist. So I could create a drone. And I could have that drone had the ability to just attach to a cell cellular signal. And I could code it to be aware of the signal that your cell phone sends out to your cell tower to tell your cell tower that your your cell phone, and I could put a small amount of explosive on it wired to a little little device and fly it. And it within, if you're within a 30 mile radius of where it's flying, it could find you zoom in on you and blow you up. It's not super sophisticated. If you happen to be inside, it probably can't get through the window. But the point is that we're not far away from that. But the bigger point is that there's a co evolutionary dynamic that if anybody figures that out, then lots of other people simultaneously are aware of the possibility and habit intrinsic game theoretic motivation to actually get better. That's the problem.
This is called rivalry game dynamics. If you and I are in competition, what an exponential field, right? So if you and I are in competition, and you're ahead of me on that competition on an exponential curve, your advantage is so significant that I have to engage in all kinds of effort to catch up and get ahead of you. Otherwise, I'm at extreme risk. Well, I do, right, I do engage in all kinds of efforts to catch up with you, which means that I'm going to do things like not be careful. I mean, I'm going to, I'm going to be willing to do things that if I had been extremely careful, I would have made the Choose choice to do well, now, if I get ahead of you in that in that race, and I've pushed the curve Now further out, I've invented some new thing that was not in the world. But by virtue of inventing it, you know, it's hard to invent things, it's easy to copy things. I've now moved the threshold of possibility for it a little bit, but now everybody's in competition with me can copy that. And that's the new fundamental. That's the new baseline. So now in order to be able to be in competition, we're all seeking new innovation. This is almost like the dangerous version of Schumpeter's creative destruction, creative destruction, capitalism in relationship with technology has the enormous benefit that the threshold of innovation is actually where we all the interesting stuff happens once I've innovated something for a little limited period of time, I have a competitive advantage that everybody in the world now has is the ability to see that I've invented it, copying is easier than inventing so they can catch up with me, they're motivated to do so because if they don't, they've got competitive disadvantage. And so the entire economy now moves to this new threshold. That's awesome. 
From the point of view of certain kinds of things from the point of view of weapons of mass destruction. It's really nasty. So that's the idea, right? It's the combination of the intrinsic dynamics of innovation is hard to do. Copying is easy to do. In a rival risk game theory. We're always in competition on the field of innovation and the field of innovation is exponential power. We've been doing that if you actually run the history line back the reason why nuclear weapons were developed was because we were concerned that the Nazis were ahead of us on nuclear weapons. So shit, we were willing to engage in the massive investment in the Manhattan Project to move the state of innovation forward, which we did enormously. And in about two years, the Soviet Union figured out how to copy it. All right, wow. That's that's, that's the moral of the story, run that same story against every other possible field of destruction. And across the nuanced levels of creativity that human beings happened to have. And you find yourself as a circumstance where the democratization of weapons of mass extinction is where we're at, kind of now, like right now and accelerating over the next two or three decades, we're just going to continue to run into circumstances where we've moved from a point where two people have to choose not to turn a key at the same time, to a point where every single human being has to affirmatively know how not to make bad decisions, lest we in fact, kill ourselves. And so that's that's the shape of the problem to me.

Boomer 26:48  
This is brilliant. Thank you, Jordan. So we all need to develop ways to learn how to not kill ourselves. 

Jordan 27:00
And I guess this is the appropriate transition into the concept of sovereignty. Yeah. And really just sort of because some of the audience may have heard us speak, but also other speak on this concept of sovereignty, but maybe some have not. Do you mind just going into first, what is sovereignty real quick and just sort of the three components of that sovereignty. At the basic level, sovereignty is your capacity to respond to the world. And when I say respond, I'm distinguishing that from react. And a good metaphor for this is the notion of balance. If you imagine, let's just say a fighter like a boxer, in the beginning was imagined that our boxer is poised, meaning that he's standing well balanced, that his ability to to shift what he's doing is actually very high, and he can read and respond. And when he responds, the action that he takes, keeps him in a position of being able to respond. So right it's my movement increases my ability to make better choices in the next moment. That's what response means. Every choice you make has the characteristic of increasing Seeing your ability to make good choices in the next moment, when you react, it has the opposite characteristic, it moves you out of balance. 
So you make a choice, that choice changes your relationship to the world such that your ability to make your next choice is actually lower. Right. So I'm a boxer, I make a really strong like I swing hard. Well, I've made a significant commitment, meaning I've moved out of balance, literally, physically, I'm out of balance, I'm over broke, my weight is over as on a certain spot. If it turns out that that choice didn't work out, I'm now actually quite significantly less capable of responding to what my opponent does for quite for a significant period of time. So what I have to do at that point is to get myself back into balance. So if you notice the way boxers move is they they make small in balance movements, really significantly reading and responding and staying in a state of high response, and then only when they're willing to make a gamble. The Naked movement that takes them out of balance, and very quickly trying to move back into balance. Right? That's a really good metaphor. 
If you don't like combat, if that makes you feel sad, first notice that that that very fact is a response to the world. We can do it with surfing, surfing does the same thing, right? You've got a flow and a movement of objective reality, which is complex and difficult, and over which you have very little control, no control, really, except your ability to actually shift and move your balance so that you're constantly in this really amazing relationship with reality, where your choices continue to upgrade your capacity to make choices. And that by the way, that that is the distinction between a novice and an expert surfer. If you watch the way an expert surfer moves, they have this amazing ability to almost fly across the way that every move they make actually increases the potential of the next move. And every once in a while they'll explode into a flurry of something that then decreases their potential. But then of course, they immediately have to come back in. So then sovereignty is your ability to respond to the world. Turns out that there are three basic components of what that means. And I should mention, by the way, that I don't mean control the world, I mean, respond to be in relationship with in a way that is fundamentally collaborative, to allow the generative the creative aspect of being in relationship with reality to emerge. So the first aspect is perception. 
The second aspect is what I call sense making and meaning making is that it's a it's a handoff, it's converting perception into sense, which is to say, raw input into something you can actually make sense of, and orienting that sense around, like notions of what the hell's going on, and then converting that sense into meaning, which is to say, into meaningful ways that one can actually respond to what's happening, the hand, the hand off a dash, and then finally, this actual action, the choosing how to act and then the execution of that action in the world as elegantly and skillfully as you as you can, and then there's a feedback loop right now you have entered into you've entered back into reality, reality will do what it does with whatever the hell you did. And then you will be able to perceive that right? So it's a, it's a constant flow. And by the way I should mention it's a complex flow, meaning there's actually stuff coming back the other direction that your vision on how it is that you, you are acting has consequences for your perception, right? If I'm in a fight, if I if I'm in a combat stance, I'm tuning myself to perceive I will perceive threats more often, if I happen to have been startled, and somebody comes up to me, I'm much more likely to perceive that as a potential threat than a potential opportunity than if I am in a state of complete call. They could both go both directions and as a school really complex, but nonetheless, that's a simple framework to kind of begin the process of grasping it.

Boomer 31:49  
Do you mind if we do a little bit deeper dive on some of these. Because I think just looking at all three of these, we could spend hours on this right if somebody wanted to really get a grasp of the model of sovereignty and sort of start to think how they could apply this to themselves starting with perception. I mean, obviously, you can do the observing of what you're observing. But what what are some of the ways that somebody can start to like, just start with perception and really understand sovereignty, the sovereignty model a little bit more.

Jordan 32:22
I imagine, you might have noticed that on occasion have actually closed my eyes. And that's an example of that piece. Perception is actually much bigger than I think we oftentimes give it credit for our bodies and our minds. And the combinations have a huge amount of ways of sensing the world. I'm going to I'm going to use a very rough term, I'm gonna call it feelings. But by feelings, I mean for example, the feeling that guides you when you're trying to get a lens into focus, or the feeling that guides you when you're driving a motorcycle to stay in balance, feeling the guides you when you are shooting a basketball such that you actually hit the basketball. 
There's a proprioception, you know how you know, when your body's in balance, there's the underlying sense of all the ways that your physiological systems are responding to the possibility space of what's going on. Right? So hey, do I feel a certain like tension? Okay, what does that mean? The point being that you've got these evolved sensors, let's just call them sensors. And there's lots of them, like thousands and 10s of thousands, and they enter into complex relationships with each other. So there's billions of potentials that are all dedicated to perceiving reality. And converting that into sense. And it is no small feat, to endeavor to be able to actually perceive all of them and allow them to enter into a very clear sensing me a simple way of doing that, especially my dad, my dad was a fighter pilot. So he taught me that this is one of the things fighter pilots do is you can do this with just vision. There's a way of sort of a allowing yourself to be envisioned where your ability to perceive your visual field goes way up. Hunters. Like if you're hunting in the forest, this happens, you're not allowing yourself to think you know what's happening. You're allowing yourself to be very, very like nuanced and sensitive to subtlety in just your visual field. And of course, you can then do that even more broadly, you can be sensitive to subtlety in the normal perceptual field, we're talking like just hearing insight. That's how you do something like hunting like if you want to know if you want to find prey out in the in the forest, you have to be become very, very sensitive to that kind of thing. But then the interior, the interior signals are even more subtle, particularly these days because we live in such a noisy world and we do such a terrible job of training people to not pay attention to their interior landscape, that things that are normal human stuff that we've been very, very separated from, honestly, and this is actually odd, but it's all honestly the case for most people. The biggest bang for the buck. 
In terms of building sovereignty is actually at the professional level is actually engaging in practices where they really learn skillfulness in sensitively noticing the subtle signals that come from all the various modes of sensing that they actually come into possession. And then they relearn a way of being in relationship with those subtle signals that allows that signal to come through clearly. I'll give you an example of where that fails the notion of triggering, if I perceive something and some part of the way that I interpret that perception generates a version of emotional response, don't allow this to continue to come towards you, which is a very basic fundamental and gross and I mean, gross instance of like coarse grained emotional response. The state that is generated by that emotional response has a characteristic of reducing our capacity to perceive sensitively it actually Literally at a neurological level, changes the brain and moves blood flow from say, for example, the neocortex into the amygdala as an example. And what that does is it shifts the nature of our capacity to perceive to perceive subtly to perceive sensitively enter perceive, caught broadly. And it's actually kind of a simple to use a simple metaphor, let's imagine that you were doing with a radio antenna. And I've got the radio antenna tuned to 99.7 and I can hear the music. If I move the dial one single notch 99.9 oddly enough, they're odd numbers, but whatever the amount of signal I get drops tremendously. That's actually a really interesting characteristic of the nature of signal in general. 
It's just real. And so to be in resonance with yourself, in this case, as an intended to be in resonance with the signal is vastly changing your capacity to actually perceive. It's not a small thing as a gigantic thing and very small changes or I would call your internal coherence can know, enormously shift that signal processing capability. Right? So to recapitulate, you've got a reinvention or rediscovering of what are in fact natural ambient capacities to just even notice that these things are happening. And then you've got a developing skillfulness to allow those things that you've now noticed and discovered to become clear, what do they mean, then you've got a developing capacity to allow these things to become coherent, to allow the relationship between among all the distinct signals to enter into a single signal. That is actually a really high quality representation of them all. That makes sense that makes sense. So is narrowing that point of view would be like, for instance, when you're seeing red, so to speak, I know that's a phrase that people use that trigger. So when you see you get triggered, you get really annoyed and you only have this narrow focus. That would be An example of just driving you out of this coherent state. Is that correct? That is correct. I should mention, by the way, it's astounding how often that happens and under what circumstances. So for example, being confused, and then getting annoyed is seeing red.

Boomer 38:15  
Okay, so a misunderstanding of something could just narrow your focus, so to speak.

Unknown Speaker  38:21  
Well, it's actually not quite that a misunderstanding of something which enters into a state of curiosity, expand your focus, and misunderstanding something of interest into a state of annoyance, or state of well, either avoidance or conflict narrows your focus. So avoidance and conflict between the two narrowing components. Going back to something you said earlier about perception and the way people perceive the world is being sort of one of these core tasks or core ways that people can start to engage in sovereignty, I would have thought it would have been the sense versus meaning The second component of the sovereignty, you know, model, if you will, just because some people struggle to make sense of a particular concept or a particular event in a certain way, and therefore, would training that area, get you into a state of sovereignty faster, or am I completely misguided there, we should be at a place of actually, honestly sort of slugging through it. Because that's what this is about. The short answer is sometimes right. In point of fact, this is all going to be absolutely particular. Yeah, individual, there is no general answer. When I start on perception, the reason I started on perception is that that is the beginning of all. And because of the specifics of what most people have experienced developmentally, most people have very narrow bands in perception. And in fact, it's also very difficult. It's not as obvious to Bill, but what you're saying is also quite correct. I actually wrote a different essay called On thinking and simulated thinking, simulated thinking is also extremely common. And it's a comprehensive trap that removes you almost entirely from sovereignty. 
If you enter through that door, if you enter to the door, Okay, well let's let's work on sense making and meaning making there is, you know, a whole lot of work and path to be engaged in there. In fact, with us just taken to the higher level, this is a whole thing, it's a comprehensive it all the pieces fit together. So no matter what door you enter into, you will quickly find that the only way to move forward is going to be found in some other portion of sovereignty. If it turns out that you have chosen to enter into the door of sense making, and you're working at the level of say, bad cognitive models, you might very quickly find yourself in a circumstance that in order to do better, you have to move into a liminal space. And when you're in a liminal space, the way that your emotional systems are responding to it is now a very confusing environment, shuts down your capacity to actually engage any form of thinking. So now we're actually kind of moving into the more of the perception sense making moves like right at the border? How does your system make sense in liminality is a is a significant open thing because you're, you're now separated from sense making, or your speaking frameworks have been dropped. And so now you're right now in that fluid space between perception and sense making, and that by the way, is not at all uncommon in somebody actually says, the way that I am trying to make sense of my environment isn't working, so they're willing to move into beginner's mind. 
Well, that's very uncomfortable, it often will expose a lot of stuff that was developed mentally paralysis, right? We arrived, we were arrived at our sovereignty as a result of our development in the world. And effective everybody's Development The world is to a greater or lesser degree traumatic. Our particular form of sovereignty is a scaffolding built around that developmental landscape. Whatever sense making framework you have right now, it is got a whole bunch of holes in it around traumas that were part of your growing up and when you Drop that sense making framework. A lot of those traumas are now raw. They're no longer buffeted and protected by cognitive and emotional strategies that you can use to avoid feeling bad things. And so it's good often happens, you're going to run into those bad things, and you're going to feel them. And so now, you just dropped your stuff right smack back down to the beginning, which is to learn how to actually feel that things at a base level without dropping out of sovereignty altogether, this is kind of the iteration. And so then you'll maybe you'll get good at it. Maybe you'll learn how to resolve the trauma or just learn how to how to build more skillfulness in not avoiding trauma when it shows itself or you don't get triggered by events. You may not have learned how to become responsive to the but at least you've learned how to not become reactive to them. And then from that basis, you may begin to be begin building up new scaffoldings of sense making. 
For example, I'm gonna use the term artfulness. So in agency, artfulness is what we're seeking. And the reason why I'm using that term is because I think it's People can connect that with sensitive and subtle perception. And to have an artful response to, let's say, just past sketball, right? The difference between a novice and a mediocre basketball player and a professional basketball player is an exquisite elegance in the flowing of their perception. particular things like proprioception, into action, right? elegance in motion is first and foremost, tied to a very fluid connection between subtle senses, and all the way through to action. That's a really nice if you just want to watch it. And if you ever seen like, the way that a dancer like a ballet dancer might practice just moving their hand. That's an interesting thing, right? Because on the one hand, it's a feedback loop between perception, all the different components, not jerking it, you're not judging it. There's a perception aspect, and an agency aspect. And so in order to actually build artfulness to go from skillfulness to artfulness means first and foremost to go all the way back down into perception and build sensitivity and sensitivity at such an unconscious level that you can actually just flow it through. 
It flows smoothly You don't have to be conscious of it you can actually now have it just be a foundational element. like think about like the way that you learn to walk compare a toddler to see a six year old to a dancer, this move up that developmental stack, in each case is a process of an inadequate level of sovereignty, right so at the edge the threshold, engaging awkwardly with a very complex thing, building a sensitivity at the perceptual level, flowing it all the way through to the point where the action level it has become artfulness, meaning that it is now smoothly and easily done, and yet very effectively. Now think what happens when your toddler loads and make it more something we're all familiar with? When you're just learning how to ride a bike or just learning how to drive a car. That is all you can do your sovereignty is it as a capacity is maxed out by the The complexity of the thing you're trying to do, as you become more skillful in doing it, as you become like this, the notion of like driving a car, feeling the road beneath you, and feeling how the tires are glued to the road and feeling and knowing from a sense making a meeting, making perspective, how subtle adjustments and where your hands on the steering wheel will shift that into into equilibrium, you've now become artful. 
You're good at driving a car, and that loop in house becomes smooth, you can run very, very significant hard, complex human actions through something which can handle them easily, almost effortlessly, and therefore you can do other stuff. You freed up the huge amount of capacity within that zone. And then Okay, now notice what happened. That's your ordinary sovereignty in response to your environment. Oh shit, it's snowed in there's ice in the road. And things have become unglued. fam. You've now dropped out of sovereignties some kind of alert has happened, your capacity to handle that artfully. I'm assuming that you're not from Sweden so you're not actually expert at that problem. You're a You're from Southern California. So you're deeply out of that's not your, your, your scheme you've now dropped out of that your sovereignty has, has shrunk enormously in response to the complexity invite you're dealing with. And so now it is all you can handle. And hopefully you've managed to panic, you haven't actually entered into reaction, at least you've stayed in a responsive environment. And you you're trying to recall, okay, how do I respond to this, and all of your resources are dedicated to handling that moment. 
So it's actually kind of a nice like a series of things you've got developmental as a toddler or a person is learning how to drive entering into a relationship with your holistic sovereignty in this particular domain is adequate to the problem. So it takes all that you can handle and then learning more and more sensitivity and nuance and skillfulness to our fullness and at that point, now have the capacity where it becomes smooth, and therefore becomes effortless. And that just becomes a component of your larger scheme of sovereignty. And that becomes a piece of your capacity to respond to your environment. And all that complexity now actually becomes available to you to respond to, I mean, now now I obviously have thrown an unbelievably significant amount of stuff at people who are listening to this, but this sort of plugged this back into the previous question, driving the cars is serious deal. Like if you actually just look at it from the outside, the notion that we have new my friend Jim Webb refers to humans as chimpanzees with clothes. We've got, we've got billions of chimpanzees with clothes curdling about willy nilly, with 4000 pounds of steel, at well in California is 7080 miles an hour. And yet, very rarely does this actually lead to any meaningful harm. It's actually rather astounding. You know, if you were to take a 16th century adventure and drop them smack dab in the middle of driving around on any normal highway, they would be out of their mind in fear for some significant period of time, they probably in fact, you would just sort of drop out of fear altogether just become at peace, because it's just too crazy. And yet, we figured out how to pull it off. 
So that's actually quite hopeful that our ability to achieve individual and collective sovereignty over very complex things is real, we can pull it off, we can do things in a way that we actually have achieved a level of artfulness in relationship to them, that we can render them not a reasonably hazardous. Well, now we just have to get really, really, really good at it. And by the way, comprehensively, so if you take a look at this metaphor of cars, I'm not just dealing with the problem of portaling balls of steel, I'm also dealing with catalytic reactors that convert fossil fuels into other kinds of molecules. And in the 50s and 60s, they were producing lead. Well, shit, that was a bad choice, our sovereignty in this case, our sensitivity, understand the complexity of chemistry and human biology was inadequate to the reality of our capacity to actually shift and change our reality. And we can create a substantial amount of harm, but we were able to figure it out and responded to it before killing everybody and so okay, we move forward. Now, of course, we're continuing to engage in that kind of a process around things like carbon dioxide and our collective sovereignty is not yet adequate to the sense making portion of that task. Meaning we don't actually really as a collective, as a group of people have enough sense of what's going on there to actually make effective choices in our agency is also not accurate. 
We don't really understand how to do that job well. But it's not, it doesn't feel like it's so far beyond our capacity, that it's hopeless. I feel like we've actually made great strides. And it's interesting to think about that particular problem, you know, Elon Musk, as a particular individual took a look at it and said, You know, I think I've got a way to solve this problem. I'm just going to cut through the Gordian knot and just going to go ahead and move us all the way to electric cars. And I know how to pull that off without having a whole lot of coordination, especially kind of interesting how that happens, we can actually do hold the whole store and the relationship between collective and individual capacity in the broader scheme of things, which is nice, like that kind of thing can happen and that's very helpful it grabs hold chunks of problems and moves them in a different sense making or collective sovereignty domain. But again, if we zoom back the problematic of exponential innovation exponential technology growth in the sub domain of rivalrous game theory, and the fact that innovation is hard to do, but easy to copy means that if our pace of collective individual collective sovereignty, doesn't keep up with our pace of our capacity to generate impact on the world, then we're well when we will, in fact, if for sure kill ourselves, it's actually a it's guaranteed, there's there's actually, no way that can't be disastrous. And it's like, I don't, I don't want that to sound preemptive or visceral. It's literally just math. It's like, you know, if, if tomorrow I have the ability to generate two levels of harm, and I have the ability to manage that at the level of two. And the next I could do four levels of harm, but I can manage it at the level of three. 
And then the next stage eight levels hard I can mention level four, right? So I've got an exponential growth of harm and a linear growth of management. And this is the world can survive a level of say 10,000 or I can actually go for a while and Notice, you know, the world is like, okay, you're doing 500 harm, but who cares? 10,500 doesn't mean I can kind of cash it out. But at an exponential rate when I'm somewhere in the range of, you know, 1000 harm, I've only a few seconds away from killing and destroying everything. And that's the key. That's the insight is that it's an acceleration issue. It's not a velocity issues an acceleration issue, and things are accelerating, your ability to respond to what the consequences of your actions are, is much less than you think. Right? you're projecting forward and saying, Okay, I'm going at 100 miles an hour. So that thing that's ahead of me is going to come at me at a certain rate, but you're wrong, because you're actually going to be going 110 miles an hour, and 120 miles an hour and 130 miles an hour. And so things are coming fast. This happens, by the way for people to jump out of airplanes, there's a thing called I think it's called ground rush, where our minds are perceiving our heading towards the earth, and we're perceiving it as it is happening at a constant velocity. 
And so we get extremely surprised by how quickly should happens as you get close. Now you can train you can become you can become skillful in relationship to acceleration, but it's not obvious it's not trivial in our in our human evolved systems are not designed to deal with that, you know, we didn't evolve in an environment things were happening that rapidly for most of our evolutionary timeframe, things took thousands of years to change meaningfully. It's only been recently were saying the Industrial Revolution or maybe the second agricultural revolution where things have changed rapidly enough, that we're even conscious of the fact that those changes were meaningful. But now we're entering into a time frame where they're in fact changing so rapidly that decades are see changes. So the number that's what I said, it's just mathematics, that we need to actually come to the point where the technologies of sovereignty become the primary object of our innovation frontier. So first and foremost, before we increase any other capacity, we have already increased our capacity for individual and collective sovereignty. So that we are always certain that our capacity to be responsive to our art, our abilities is always equal to our abilities. Does that make sense?

Boomer 53:10  
It does but it evokes a lot of questions. Maybe I'm seeing the wrong side of the story here, but if I look at the world right now, and I see that we're developing all these technologies, Ai, crisper, I guess, nuclear energy to a certain extent, and sovereignty. The focus on sovereignty as a development and one of those technologies seems to be behind those technologies. So I guess, question that I have is, how do we catch up? And that part B of that question is really, we've talked a lot about individual sovereignty, how do we go to collective sovereignty? 

Jordan 54:00
Alright, so let's put a note right here, because what's about to happen is going to be really good. I want to get to the good stuff. First, I want to lay a little bit of groundwork. So let's start with a very interesting problematic. And that is, unfortunately, the strategies associated with rival risk game theory, conflict, competition that is in the shape of conflict, as for a long time understood that sense making itself is the kind of thing that often you want to be able to break. But in the after the Cold War started, you know, after we realized we couldn't just beat the other guy up with bigger bombs, we entered into a hyper acceleration of what I call the war on sense making. This is actually excruciating Lee problematic because if we've identified building capacity in the technologies of sovereignty is the most needful thing. Being an environment with winning the war on sense making is in fact, one of the primary areas of rival risk competition is particularly bad. Does that make sense why that's the case?

Boomer 54:50  
No, do you mind just unpacking that a little bit? 

Jordan 54:55
Sure. So it's very difficult. Let's just use this as an example. So what we're endeavoring to do You and I, we are endeavoring to engage in the formation of a coherence between us, we are collaborating, which is to say that we're endeavoring to construct a collaborative sovereignty. And to jump to the end, the only way we figured this out as we build collaborative sovereignty, no particular individual, Socrates can be anywhere near enough. If I thought you were lying to me, if I thought you were trying to manipulate me or take advantage of me, or even if I just entered into a situation where I couldn't trust you enough to tell you the full and honest truth that is catastrophic for collaborative sovereignty, it's not a little bit bad, it's actually catastrophic. Or you can't even begin to enter into collaboration when you're in a frame when you're when you're in a space of potential defection. Okay, well, that pretty much describes our entire global environment. I can't trust anything that is currently conveyed through any kind of signaling mechanism, if it's not human to human right, in this conversation with you I can enter into a space of potential collaboration. 
And I happen to have made a commitment to being willing to take the risk of doing so. So I will always ensure and a volunteer making myself fully vulnerable to you detecting to me. And then if you know if it turns out you do, I just sort of shut down and stop engaging with you and kind of cleave you from the graph like you were no hostile, no more engagement. It's actually literally called double tit for tat in game theory, but the technology is broadcast don't work that way. So I can't trust any signal that comes from broadcast full stop doesn't matter. I don't care if I think they're well intentioned or not the underlying incentive structures and organizational dynamics that control the broadcast signals guarantee that they are so deeply embedded in the world since making that they cannot be trusted, which means that they cannot be used for collaboration, which means that any signal that comes from them or drives them is effectively a virus that breaks down our capacity to enter into individual collaborative sovereignty. It's actually a big deal. What I just said, just declare it on media basically.
It is a comprehensive existential conflict that must be one. And here's the thing. You know, the phrase was I think, if you go to war with monsters, be wary lest you become a monster yourself. This is a place where we have to have enough individual sovereignty that we can actually go enter into this war without becoming monsters ourselves that we have to actually have enough capacity to recognize what it is to create a boundary without entering into struggle. I don't know if you've ever practice Aikido but Aikido is a good example of what that feels like not Aikido, but I've done my Tai, that's very different, different tackling, you can actually if you if you if you sort of imagine Well, what I would suggest is just doing a little bit of Aikido and then comparing the two and that actually gives you a whole lot of the sense the oddly enough the Jedi in the early Star Wars movies actually had a sense of this and to be able to, to connect with what it is to be extremely capable of actually engaging in combat without Actually at the level of your heart or soul being in a fight is the thing. Okay, so that's, that's a bit far afield, but it's interesting. But here's the thing. This is actually circling back to an earlier question earlier point. As far far too many people allow themselves to just enter back into infection when the liminal event opened, I don't care what mechanism you that you use to enter into sense making that I'll use an example. I don't care if you read the New York Times or watch Fox News. These are both straight up viruses. Everything that comes out of them is reducing your sovereignty, the tone, the facial expressions, the body language, the frame, the expectations, the assumptions, the invitations to entering into relationship, everything that comes out of these is a virus is destructive of your sovereignty. Now, if you recognize that you can enter into relationship with them in a fashion that is effective, meaning you can observe them you can know that you're not entering into collaboration with them, right? You're watching something that is an evidence of hostility and learning how to respond to it skillfully, you can do that. And that's actually, by the way, very important. 
I have a nuts set of sensors that I have out in the world that I observe, and spend time on to be perceptive of what's happening in the world. But I'm not letting it in to my psyche. I have boundaries on what is true and what's not true. That's unfortunate, because that's really hard. And of course, that means the field, almost everybody is exposed to a field that is pulling us out of sovereignty and putting us into conflict that even further pushes up sovereignty. And it's and it's not simple. It's really sophisticated, because remember, it's the war on sensitive and it's been going on since at least the 1940s. Which means that our understanding of propaganda and our understanding of human psychology and our understanding of messaging and our understanding of mind control, and I mean that in the strong and weak sense is amazing, and we don't actually have any idea how sophisticated it is. I'm actually in the process of writing a blog post called I'm currently calling it The Ballad of James Jesus Angleton unit II. 
Was if you don't mind enlighten me. He was the he was the first head of counterintelligence at the CIA. Think about that counter Intel, the first head of counter Intel at the CIA, he went completely insane, like schizo phrenic all the way down. Absolutely completely insane. Because that's what happens when that's your relationship to your environment. Obviously, the KGB was trying to infiltrate the CIA. Well, how do you know? How do you know when the individuals you're interacting with are themselves hyper sophisticated agents who are actually privy to things that you're not privy to and are trying to disrupt your own understanding of reality. We're all James Jesus Angleton. And if you're if you are in that field, you're in trouble. Okay, so that's a that's the that's the context, right? That's the context of this problem. So we're going to double whammy. On the one hand, we're rapidly appreciate approaching a level of challenge that we know that is way beyond anything we've ever considered possible, much less dealt with. On the other hand, we have to innovate a level of software That is adequate to it, which is something that we've never even begun to contemplate much less developed. And finally on the omnipresent and always ironic third hand, we're doing so in the context of a war on our capacity to do that, that is profound and accelerating. So that's that's the that's the that's actually the situation. So what did I say there was good news? Well, it turns out, there's actually really good news. It's interesting, actually, the problem is exponential is it turns out the essence of exponential is collaboration. Okay, that's not obvious, unfortunately, be nice if it is obvious to see if I can find a way to make that a little bit more clear.

Boomer 1:01:34  
Going back to the innovation on top of or copying on top of innovation leading to further innovation. Is that it?

Jordan 1:01:39  
Yeah, let me do it this way. Actually, this is actually probably a better way of doing it in World War Two, the Manhattan Project and Bletchley Park. And I'm just going to use those as metaphors. I know there's a lot of nuance here, but let's just assume that they're more or less the way that they're articulate. And so the Turing story and the and the Oppenheimer story, these were recognitions of the necessity of creating an vironment, they were conducive to innovation, so that the level of innovation was adequate to achieve the objective, something happened there, which was an recognition on the part of conflict of the necessity of innovation and of the discovery that the environment that is necessary to achieve innovation is of a certain kind. The Manhattan Project was a collaboration. Bletchley Park was actually a collaboration as well. I mean, Turing was the singular genius unit make made it happen. It was a collaboration. The space of collaboration is the fertile field from which springs all creativity and thus all innovation. It has always been that case. But because we're now entering into a situation where the raw level of creativity, the raw level of innovation is the thing, the thing that matters, it's becoming more more clear. So if you look at it, for example, just like the arc of the culture of technology companies, going back to say Ford, the Ford Corporation, and all the way up to say Google. 
So for General Motors, IBM, Hewlett Packard, Apple is just skipped a Google and there's a whole bunch of other ones in there. Microsoft, Google is just just like that. What you'll notice is that in order to achieve a higher level of innovative capacity, which is to say, in order to get more of that thing, which is in fact, the competitive advantage, each one of these organizations had to innovate a higher level of collaboration, they had to redesign the underlying nature of what their core culture was in a direction of more capacity to collaborate. Collaboration, the space of collaboration is the fertile field from which creativity and innovation springs and because it just straightforward technical innovation or technical capitalism, the ability to be more creative, the ability to be more innovative was the currency of competitive advantage that has shown us the arc. Well, what that means is if we can Just find ways to continue to improve our ability to discern these spaces of collaboration, right? how we create environments where human beings are increasingly capable of coming into collaboration with each other, which then means to discern the spaces, and the ways in which we can become more coherent with each other, Then, and only then we can achieve higher levels of creativity and achieve higher levels of innovation. Well, we're almost there. You may notice if we kind of listened or rethink about this entire story, discernment, and coherence and insight, are the characteristics of sovereignty, which is to say that precisely to the degree to which that we become skillful in developing individual sovereignty and creating spaces where we can enter into relationships of increasing the sovereignty, that is the most that that that kind of thing. 
I'm just going to call that right now a creative coherence, that kind of thing. This gathering together of individuals who are achieving high levels of personal sovereignty, and learning how to enter into relationships of increasing collaborative sovereignty, creative coherence is perfectly aligned with the essence of creativity and innovation. So if what you're doing is you're racing in a conflict of how to go about engaging in innovation, the place to be, you know, to be further along that curve, is to be in a space of coherent creativity. And that is the point at which there's a shift from the rival risk game theoretic dynamics to anti rivalrous, game theoretic dynamics in a rivalrous, game theoretic dynamic, you and I are some at some point in competition struggling over some thing that one of us can have the other one can't. And therefore we enter into a psychology in a relationship with associate with competition at some at some minimum point in anti rape, rivalrous, game theoretic dynamics, we're in a situation where my ability to benefit increases every single time, your ability to benefit increases, which means that the best possible choice I can make for myself is perfectly aligned with the best possible choice you can make for yourself. And it produces in this thing, this this anti rivalrous relationship, which is to say, again, I'm just saying this in many different ways, collaborative spaces, creative coherence is the most capable of creativity and the most capable of innovation. 
So there's a perfect linkage, if we actually begin the process of coming into an putting sovereignty individual collective, at the forefront, that place, that place where we've actually achieved that becomes the locus of the highest level of potential innovation. And because it's the locus of high load, highest level potential innovation, it becomes a generative attractor because Auntie rivalrous is is that capslock parklets means The more people who participate, the more value that generates in an exponential level. And so the shifts, we've now shifted from the rival risk on the game theoretic curve, which is ruinous to the ante rivalrous on the game theoretic curve, which is, well, it's perpetual. Like there's nothing that that should continue to proceed until there's unless there's something about reality itself that causes it to sort of elegantly slow down, right? That was a gigantic payload. And there's some pretty poorly right concepts that I threw down. So I imagine that I didn't actually deliver much, but hopefully it was at least a gesture in the right direction. 

Boomer 1:07:30  
I think it was very helpful. Now, one question that came out of that, is that you said things like the Manhattan Project in the past where recognition on the part of conflict to or the conflicting side that they needed to innovate, right? How do you see sovereignty expanding? If the government in this well, these are in conflict in the past has been government? How do you see sovereignty expanding if governments are not aligned, or if governments aren't cooperating, in general with this concept of individual sovereignty?

Jordan 1:08:00
We're going to have to reinvent governance, which almost certainly will imply routing around government. And I, it's funny, like I said that with a very much straight face. And it's because it's oddly enough in the scope of things actually not that much of a big deal. We're already in the process of doing it. I mean, just think about like the steam of cryptocurrency, one minute before cryptocurrency happened, it was absolutely impossible for anybody to create a currency that wasn't a state actor. Like literally, the nanosecond, before the Satoshi white paper was published, it was categorically impossible. And, you know, we now sit in the era where it's obviously trivial. There's like, I don't know, 10s of thousands of them right now. So that, it's happening and it's turned out, it's actually in the space of creative genius. It's just another way of putting it, and particularly collaborative, creative genius, which is to say, people being able to enter into collaboration with each other. The power of that is so enormous These problems end up being prosaic. So government, as big as it is, and it's powerful, don't get me wrong is actually miniscule in comparison to the potential of what happens if we become artful in these technologies of sovereignty in these creative coherences. 
And it's actually something interesting going on right now in the world of blockchain. Broadly speaking, it's actually the whole point is that it's, it's not that so I become very interested in in a project called holo chain effect. I gotta tell you right now that even though I don't know for sure, all of my intuitions are telling me that these super big deal, so much so that I'm pointing a lot of attention at it. And the reason why I'm positioning it is interesting is that it's part of an arc. So if you look at the arc, it's basically been Bitcoin, a theorem and then questionmark, meaning that everything else that's happened in blockchain has been a kind of an exposition of those two primary moves. And what's interesting about those two primary moves is they are both moves in the direction of more capacity to engage in collapse. duration and hollow chain is really quite vastly more of that sort. There's a phrase that that I like, which is called culture eats strategy for lunch with the hollow chain people seem to have done really well is they got culture, right. I don't know if you've spent any time in the crypto universe. But one of the biggest challenges, particularly the Bitcoin subset of the crypto universe has been, it's called I'm going to call it culture, meaning that all too often they've come into situations where conflict resolution looks an awful lot like 12 year old kids on a playground. And that's not a particularly effective way to resolve conflict. 
It's definitely not a particularly effective way to engage in collaboration because it generates hurt feelings it generates people who feel like the other people are not to be trusted sort of begins to fragment. And so the collective intelligence breaks up. It breaks up physically meaning people are now sorted into different groups that are now in competition with each other and engaging in all kinds of weird, stupid shit. But also even the individuals in subgroups are now left the certain sense of like, wait a minute, maybe this is not a safe place to be. I need to be less trusting of the people around me. So you've got like a decreasing capacity hollow chain actually seem to have spent a lot of work on just building sovereignty as individuals and a group. First and foremost, they've actually been working on this thing for 10 years. Well, in advance of actually Bitcoin existing, they actually work in a different project called the meta currency project. And the group that worked on it actually has consciousness of questions like individual sovereignty, and questions like how do we enter into spaces of collaboration that actually got really good at that. And on the basis of that they've actually constructed something which when you double click on it, and take a look at the code, and the architecture, and the design and the strategy is really, really good, like a lot better than anything else that I've seen. That's an example. That's an example of two things example, the fact that we are ambiently discovering that the niche of selective advantage in the contemporary environment happens to be in the place of increasing individual and collaborative sovereignty, if I'm right hollow chain is going to outcompete the theorem, which by the way means that I'm moving a lot of my crypto investments into hollows fest.
Okay, so that the niche of selective competitive advantages in the space of individual collaborative sovereignty and that the generativity of that fact, is enormous. But it's it's it what ends up happening as a consequence of getting there is really significant. I call a chain maybe a potential Not right now an actual but a potential of say, 1000 times more creative or capacity to deliver real innovation into the world, then a theorem has been, and I'd say, right, now we can say that the theorem is about 100 times more creative than Bitcoin, if you look at all the kind of things that were developed in that space. So that's, like, that's interesting. I would say right now, I'm making a bold claim, but I could be very well wrong. But I haven't done enough work to be able to feel super confident, but my spidey sense is telling me that, and it's a really good example of the nature of what we're talking about.

Boomer 1:12:48  
Jordan, I want to transition a little bit because one of the the, the project that you're involved in and how I came to know you, neuro hacker collective in terms of attacking this whole Question of sovereignty and how to develop sovereignty both on the individual and on a collective level. How do you guys do that in terms of the products to you that you produce? Do you mind just going a little bit on what you have quality and quality of mind out right now? Yep. how those help individuals develop sovereignty.

Jordan 1:13:21  
Okay. So first, and this is actually I think important. This is mostly a question for Daniel. neuro hackers is vastly more centered on his area of expertise than mine. I am a collaborator, he is the core collaborator. He's the touring in this story and I'm the guy who kind of buys springs during his lunch. It's a pretty fair comparison. So this lets me look at it from the point of view first, why why this particular thing and approach and then how I can I can I can simulate the How pretty well so for purposes of like pretend looking like I know what I'm talking about, I'll do an okay job, but it's quarter recognize that I'm mostly simulating it. Why? Well, we've already identified why the technologies of sovereignty are the thing, the thing that actually is is the most new In the moment, why this particular thing that we've got two things going on. One is the problem of, of what I call immediate rest. We're in the world, we're in a world that is happening in in ways. And we are in that world, meaning we have certain capabilities of being present in the world. 
I can't snap my fingers and make things happen, I have to actually do stuff in a relationship to my personal capabilities are so in looking at the space of possibility of what could be done by us for real right now, and then attempting to consider that in the context of what actually must be done, in what order. We ended up recognizing this particular moment. This particular event was a good use of time, a good place to attend. So it shows up like this. On the one hand, the physical body is the primary instrument of sovereignty. Let's put it very simply, with very limited exceptions. If you're hungry, like really hungry, you can't you can't be sovereign, your body hunger signals are going to override your habits and your route. If you're physically ill, we can't be sovereign, right. And this actually, by the way, shows up not just in the sense that if you're physically ill, you can't do stuff, but also affect your psychology, your cognition, you know, as we all know, if you're depressed, you're not getting enough sleep, like if your body's up, everything else is really, really hard. And by contrast, if your body and in particular, now I'm thinking of you remember, your brain is a part of your body. So that's important. If your body is dialed in, then everything else gets a whole lot easier. It's like a whole bunch of stuff that used to be problematic drops out, that's actually really interesting. We can actually solve say, issues of anxiety, not behaviorally, but biochemical. 
And I don't mean Xanax, I mean, actually solve the issue, but we'll get to how in a second, that distinction between Xanax and for real is important. Okay, so it's a super high lever. Here's another piece, we gotta swim against her with capitalism. It's there. It's got all kinds of problematics it's got all kinds of awesome advantages. One of the awesome events Is that the ability to deliver products into the hands of billions of people exists? Now, of course, if that product happens to be a can of Coke, that's really bad. But there are ways if you can develop a product, which is broadly and well designed to increase sovereignty, then you're now increasing sovereignty on math, using swimming with using the advantages of the amazing enormous, Incredible Machine that capitalism is constructed. Right now we are able to deliver quality to people in New Zealand and Abu Dhabi and and all over the world except for China right now. And I should say that that we are quite decidedly not apple. We are not a sophisticated, well oiled corporate machine, because we are eating our dogs, which means we're experimenting and how to engage in collaborative sovereignty. First and foremost, it would have been a short sidedly easier to do this, like a venture funded company, but we've been very careful to maintain the centering on collaborative coherence, which means that we're not as effective in the short term, but hopefully on the basis of actually being able to go exponential. And there's, there's evidence that's beginning to happen, which is nice. Now, here's good. Let me go to one more that Lars the body is a lever in sovereignty, where the next one happens to be that we have entered into a space which is ventured into a place of opportunity. And Daniel and a handful of other people in particular, where we have enough understanding of the psychological, cognitive, neurological, biochemical stack, that we can actually engage in effective action, elegant, artful action in that space. You know, that wasn't true 10 years ago. It is true now. 
It's actually quite decided that was astounding. By the way, you can do this not just in a psycho effective area. We can do it in all kinds of places. And we're like I think I mentioned before we started recording that we've got, like 100 different products that have been identified and about seven That are, are well characterized. And only a handful are in the psycho effective space, like say sleep. Others are in places like cellular regeneration, longevity, immune response, aging, anti aging, anti aging broadly, like actually, bifurcating anti aging, and feeling useful is one that makes you actually live longer. And there's another one that makes your current being in the world younger, more useful. And that's because of the fact that the fact that we are on the threshold of a new way of engaging in how we go about doing scientific discovery and how we go about generating scientific hypotheses, that is broadly synthetic, rather than broadly analytic. And this is I mean, that's a gigantic digression that is probably not worth doing. But the point is that that opportunity exists, right? So we have a really interesting fine point, that we're in a situation where we have the possibility by virtue of executing on a strategy of deploying new capacities, new potential specifically for upgrading Psychological and cognitive capacities, and then using that as a leverage point to go into the broader pieces of the biological body piece of stack and potentially a mess, right? 
So if I was in the business of trying to figure out how to actually go about constructing sovereignty, that's one of the things that I would do first, because now what happens is, every single human being who enters into right relationship with quality is meaningfully increasing their personal sovereignty at the lowest level of the stack, and at the highest level of the stack, meaning that their body is becoming more available to be responsive. And they're actually increasing the capacity of their conscious awareness to make use of that simultaneously, and therefore, becoming capable of becoming part of the conversation. So going back to the beginning, for example, if you find yourself really struggling with how to live in a post Trump world quality is actually a pretty good answer, because it'll actually help your body deal with stress and the negative consequences of Living in an environment that is hostile and confusing, not perfectly, but it'll help actually it can help quite a bit, actually, depending on what dysfunctions you have is is really good at addressing dysfunctions and will increase your, your psychological and cognitive capacity to begin the process of actually interacting with the liminal questions. 
So that's it like it's like a little, it's a little tiny instrument that is a bit autocatalytic. And hopefully, hopefully a lot autocatalytic was just say that that people will begin to enter into this relationship, what we're calling the field of empowered responsibility, meaning they enter into a conscious relationship that is like a, like a mirror, the we've got the looking glass, Alice, Alice's Looking Glass, you could be on one side of the looking glass where you are reactive, you're not conscious of your capacity to enter into personal responsibility for your response in responding to the world. And then there's the other side of the looking glass, where you're entering into the field of empowered responsibility does not mean that you are in fact actually sovereign. But it means that you have chosen to begin taking that path and that choices to First Choice, like, if you haven't made the choice, it's very difficult to go any further. But once you've made the choice, then two good things happen. One is you become more available to yourself. And to as you become more capable of entering into collaboration, I can collaborate with you, and or anybody else who's chosen to enter into that space. 
Because I can say something that maybe doesn't sound right. But instead of going from confusion into avoidance, you may be now learned that going from confusion to curiosity is a more powerful response. And that's kind of it once we can do that, now we're beginning to collaboratively build. It has to be collaborative. unfortunate. This is not an Elon Musk moment. Not Unfortunately, it simply is not an Elon Musk moment, it just is an unfortunate at all. If it works, it's wonderful. But we can begin the process of figuring out how we go about collaboratively constructing these spaces of creative coherence. And that's it. That's that's been the whole game. So this is not a trivial Right, we are not in this for the purposes of making dough by selling brain pills, as some of the people who work with it pointed out is like, okay, be careful, that's not the thing. This is actually all part of a reasonably well considered seamless web fully connected with the most challenging problems, well a of the moment and be, as far as I can tell, have ever been faced. And I can personally attest to just quality as effectiveness. I've taken it for about 10 months now. And just like you said, being able to engage in that conversation and really reduce those anxieties so that you can be more open minded, and admit when you don't understand something and see, Curiosity has been, frankly, life changing for me. So thank you very much for that one. I guess a couple more questions, because I know we're running late on time. Jordan Jordan is I'm just looking at your background and you start at Texas a&m, Harvard Law divac And you've developed this thought process around complex systems, complex science, complex system science, so to speak.

Boomer 1:23:08  
How did you get started? Like, what what books came to mind? What books came to you? Where was it interactions with people like Daniel, what? what really got you started down this path?

Jordan  1:23:21  
Okay, so we have to start the beginning at the very beginning, which is, on the one hand, I was lucky enough to be born into an environment that was pretty darn conducive to the kind of being I happened to be and the kinds of being I happened to be, doesn't work in the world in which we happen to live. For whatever reason, none of the ordinary mechanisms of achieving sense of fitting in or achieving a sense of success, worked at a basic level. So fill in the blank, you know, School, the notion that the teacher approves of you or that you got an A actually made me angry, not satisfied in business being offered a lucrative job or some sort of upwardly mobile position, maybe feel depressed, not successful in relationship with other people like interacting with them as a child and as an adolescent, an inability to actually feel met or heard, and an inability to actually perceive why it was other people suck. Third thought that certain things were attractive or interesting, right? So this was an interesting dynamic. On the one hand, the things that would, Brett Weinstein actually very specifically calls this the hill climbing, right? So there was a path of climbing a hill that existed, that if you could climb the hill was a really good choice. Didn't work. It just wasn't, wasn't my thing. I wasn't that kind of a creature. And yet on the other hand, I was just lucky enough to be in an environment where the kind of being that I am was supported enough that I didn't get broken on the rocks. 
Most of the people I've encountered many of that of this sort of the ladder support did not have that luck. And so they ended up more or less broken on the rocks, which is super sad. And what are the other things that we got buried that got us very motivated around quality, it was actually endeavoring to heal as many of those people as we possibly can, with a sense of compassion and love and also out of sense of just practicality, which is we actually need those kinds of people think, again, back to tour, as an example, broken on the rocks, right actually died as a consequence of not being adapted to the world in which he found himself. Okay, so in that context, and that characteristic, one of the interesting things that I noticed and this is actually literally me retroactively looking back on my own development, and say, What the hell's going on there is that certain things in my experience, showed up with a kind of luminous intensity, and mysteriously, meaning. They weren't ordinary other people didn't say, Hey, this is cool. 
I would like to come across something you know, just be like, that's attracted like like a five year old, a six year old, a seven year old, an eight year old and I would get reasonably obsessed about them. And since I spent a substantial amount of my time solo, would effectively indulgent them. And so this would be, for example, computers. I was very deeply involved in computers about as early as you could have been deeply involved in computers it historically, like Born in 1971. And you playing with computers, more or less, as soon as personal computers became available at all. And then a lot like it actually, my wife asked me a question like if you've been born now, what would you do? And the short answer is, well, that kid would have never gotten off the internet, which is not healthy. But that's probably what would have happened. The only reason I got off the internet back when I had a modem was because my parents needed to use the phone. If you recall how those work. And all the other stuff that interesting enough, we can actually broadly call nerd nerd culture for example, things like science fiction and comic books or role playing games and science itself, mathematics. These were all and here's the thing. I had this really interesting recognition that each one of these is kind of like a bat signal. Or a lighthouse a beacon by a kind of mind or kind of spirit there was endeavouring to signal out the space of creative coherence, in spite of being in a world that was hostile to that deburring to speak, in collaboration with anyone who was willing to actually listen to. 
And some of these cases, they're actually cryptographic a lot of the keys this cases actually meaning. Many, many geniuses in the past figured out how to say something that was attractive in the prosaic language of the world in which they lived, but actually carried a more fundamental payload for those who were able to hear it. In fact, that's it that was somebody figured that out a long time ago, and it's quite common. And for whatever reason, I found that I was attracted to those kinds of things, and repulsed by things that felt bad, like, you know, watching TV shows, or movies or reading books that had a certain I know you say, exploitative nature. to them that they would they used your own humaneness to take advantage of you. Good marketing is a basically. And so that just ends up becoming it builds on itself if you when you're like 10 for different reason find yourself reading nature and trying to actually do the thing that Nietzsche says which is not become a follower. His his whole, the whole point of niches is to actually listen, and then stop following. That's a good Okay, what does that mean when you're 10 years old? And then you turn the corner and say reading azimoff and saying, Okay, now I can imagine these vast possibilities what's available in the universe. And then going and say, playing a role playing game where you begin to recognize that identity, the identity that you're handed as a human being in the world is no more real than the identity that you just adopted in your role playing game. 
You know, I am as much Jordan Hall as I am. Are the dwarf and it's just okay. Well, how much time do I spend there? And how do other people relate to me it's it's a, it's not exactly the same. But it's it there's a lot of similarity and it creates a consciousness space, it creates a fluidity of being able to not be addicted to a particular paradigm to a particular identity, or being addicted to not being addicted to them, right to be sort of flitting about, but actually a fluidity and liminal space that allows you to be receptive to the possibilities in a kind of openness. And then ended up happening was, I guess, for my in my particular case, two characteristics. One was, for variety of reasons, not the least of which is that my dad was a military man, I built a substantial skillfulness in strategy. How I showed up as being able to be in relationship with my dad was to be really good at strategy, like strategy games, for example. And the second was it turns out that nerd culture was on the ascendance so having a deep familiarity with and artfulness and say computers was really you 1994. So I combine those two combined a high capacity and strategy with the high awareness and broad spectrum skillfulness in all the various aspects of nerd culture to begin getting into being a technology entrepreneur, but never ever, from the point of view of being a businessman, I have no interest whatsoever in that entire category. 
The whole point is always been the thing that I'm talking about right now, which I've always been connected to, as far as I can tell, which is actually a childhood level is literally just being able to enter into a space of collaboration otherwise, and that is playing with good friends. So So then what ended up happening and I don't know if you paid attention to the bio, but I was quite successful. I actually achieved a certain meaningful level of success. I took a company that I had specifically founded public on the NASDAQ. And then it ended up happening was that I was handed the wonderful opportunity of feeling all the various traumas that I had not resolved sort of collapse on top of me all at once, Jordan. This has been absolutely phenomenal. conversation. One of the things I just want to close with is just First off, I thank you again, for all the work you've done around quality. And thank you for this awesome conversation, just a couple of books that you'd recommend in terms of people reading on. Yes, let's do complex system science in order to get started, where would you Where would you start? I would read a book called 1000 years of nonlinear history and war, the age of intelligent machines, both by Manuel de Landa top tool you use to get yourself into a state of peak performance. Actually, I may not know the answer to this question.

Boomer 1:31:36  
The top tool is breathing. So are we talking diaphragmatic breathing or something? No, a whole like 19 different breathing techniques depending on the situation. So breathing as an entire portfolio, that becoming mindful of breathing turned out to be huge. I mean, what can you be taught that almost from birth? The second was all the simple different variations on meditation and mindfulness. And then the third actually was quality. Jordan, thank you again. This has been awesome. My mind his mind is blown and so many good ways. So I'm going to take this all away and I've got a lot to digest here. But thank you again for being on the show. And I would love to have you back on sometime soon. But appreciate it.