Chris 0:05  
Seems we're in a very paradoxical time that in some ways, you can look at many different kind of indicates and say this is the best time to be alive. And yet, at the same time, you and a lot of other writers that I'm following have a real kind of apocalyptic tinge to their writing. Are those two things true at the same time?

Jordan 0:25  
That's a very good question. Let me see if I can puzzle it out. So one of the metaphors that I've found is very helpful is the metaphor of a caterpillar. voraciously devouring leaves. So the point of view of the caterpillar there is a the experience of becoming fatter and fatter and all things are going well. It's good to be back caterpillar. Now from the point of view of the leaves, things are Weather for that. And if you zoom back out, you will look at it and say, Hmm, there's a paradox that on the one hand, it's never been a better time to be a caterpillar. And on the other hand, I'm noticing that the leaves are getting ready to go away. And so things are about to get very bad very quickly. But then there's even deeper insight, which is that caterpillars devour and destroy everything around them in the process of endeavouring to become a butterfly. And so I think that's actually the deeper notion that if you look at our civilization, from the perspective of it is a caterpillar. It is becoming more of what it is. So it's flourishing on that basis. It is rapidly consuming a substantial fraction of the environment that's necessary for it to continue being what it is. And then this ends up in one of two possible states. Either it Some kind of wall where some piece of that support structure fails, which is just dots, or it actually interests into this moment of metamorphosis, and it transforms into another kind of being all together. I think that's the perspective that I'm bringing. I can't speak for anyone else.

Chris 2:17  
What are the indicators that make you think that things are getting much worse than maybe they appear on the surface?

Jordan 2:22  
Well, I guess probably the most important is, is the fact that I've been looking at this now for quite some time. And so the models that I've been using to try to make sense of a number of different caught just systems for now different pieces or characters because the world have predicted a number of things that were at the time. Didn't seem to be reasonable. Let's go with like the Trump election. This is kind of a very concrete one. So the models predicted Brexit, the models predicted drop or something along those lines, not exactly the events of those characteristics or specific my specific models, right. And so I'm sensing some kind of simple if I have models and the models are predictive, and particularly when they're predictive in a way that is contra conventional wisdom, I give those models more credence. So I run lots of models, I don't have like two or three, I've got lots and lots of models. And some of them had been increasingly accurately predicting circumstances and others have been less. And so these have began, get less attention to these and give more credence to these. And as I watch these, these are the ones that tell me that we're on a particular kind of trajectory. And that trajectory has, well, it has characteristics that you can use to say, Okay, here's what it looks like. And here's how it would play out. And more importantly, it actually has a very specific finite endpoint, so that we're on the kind of trajectory that has an ending to it. And that many of metrics are many of the phenomenon that we're witnessing in many different ways. Right now it's showing up very viscerally in terms of the way the culture and society are feeling, particularly the West are indicative of their of the fact that we're kind of far along the curve on this particular dynamic. So that's the, that's the way that I'm going about doing it. So there's a lot of Unfortunately, the explaining that double clicking, and it's not easy. I've actually spent some time creating some YouTube videos and some medium posts trying to actually take a particular set of concepts and making them small enough to convey in a bite.
Then I guess some of that's been successful. But if we're talking about a curve, and you're saying that we're far along this curve, and it has an end point, what is the curve? What is the end point? Well, the reality is there's actually many, many curves, and they're not all the same, meaning that they're not they don't have the same basis as the same color. structure behind them. So I'll give you three. One curve is called the tainter curve. The tainter curve is was used by an anthropologist to try to figure out describe why it was that complicated civilizations collapsed. He called the collapse of complex civilizations. But I have to modify that for for specific reasons. And we can investigate with you like what this curve is and why it works and how it shows up. But it has to do with the way that human beings design and reinforce the kinds of institutional structures that we use to meet our needs. And there's a particular set of characteristics of how these structures become bound, meaning they become most use oils an example. So in the beginning We use oil partially for kerosene, by the way to light things up. And as it as a secondary distillate, we have gasoline, we don't really use much gasoline and it's actually kind of easy to get you're in Pennsylvania, but little bit of effort, you can get some oil out of the ground. So then we begin to say repurpose gasoline into being fuel for cars. And so this increases the utility the values is expands the potential of our of our civilization. So we kind of moved up this curve, our energy usage, the amount of energy we have to spend to get the oil and converted to gasoline returns a substantial return on energy investment. And so we do, right, so what ends up happening is two distinct things simultaneously. One is we actually expand our underlying use to this energy source, we build more cars. And maybe because it makes it easier for us to grow food, we grow more foods, and we have more people. So we expand the base that uses and relies upon this capacity. But at the same time, we're also plucking the low hanging fruit have access to the resource. So it gets harder. We have to actually drill deeper wells, or we have to frack to be able to pull out the kind of oil.
Now, what's interesting is, this is why I said it's complex. This is not a simple thing. It's actually the second order that matters. Because what we'll do is we'll say, okay, what's gotten harder, so we'll invest in r&d. So we'll get smarter. So we get more, we get certain advancements in the underlying technical basis that we use to extract the resource. So we have a curve on the technical basis, but winds up happening is is that as we're picking the low hanging, lowest hanging fruit at the resource level, we're also picking the lowest hanging fruit at the r&d level, right? So there's a certain period of time where r&d is kicking ass, we spend a million dollars on r&d, we get massive advances. But at a certain point in time that has what's known as an S curve, meaning that we've picked all the low hanging fruit in innovation space, we've figured out all the easy wins. And now we're starting to work harder to get harder wins. And we figured out how to do drilling that goes diagonal, and that was one really nice win and we got you got that one. We have to do fracking. Now we have to do whatever's next, right. So it just gets harder and harder and harder. So at a certain point, what happens is, is that we may have to spend 100 million dollars to get a 2% increase in performance, while simultaneously, we're now really picking deep fruit. So it's getting deeper and deeper and harder and more expensive to extract. And in the meantime, over on this side of the house, we've built an entire gigantic global infrastructure that absolutely is fully fundamentally dependent on gasoline from virtually everything. Like if your car stopped tomorrow, you couldn't get groceries, right? So we become more dependent on the resource we become, we tap out the r&d side, which in the beginning looks awesome for getting massive gains until we've reached the endpoint. 
And we've made it we've gotten to the end of the easy pickings and things are getting harder and harder and harder. So what happens is we generate fragility, we generate an environment where we're having to spend more and more energy, either in terms of r&d or in terms of just absolute activity, to maintain where we are, but it's actually getting harder and harder to hold and the consequences of falling back become worse and worse. Now This curve actually has one other characteristic to it, which is, we're now way over our skis, like it may have been that call it 1920-1930, we could have decided to shift and go from an gasoline economy to say, an electricity economy. And we don't get committed to cars. But we've we've passed that fork in the road. So all the different choices we could have made in the past and have become narrowed and narrowed, narrowed. And we just have to double down more and more and more on this. So it's actually kind of like become an addict, become addicted to particular approach. And just like an addict, that approach is starting to give us diminishing returns. And so that hits a wall. So that the tainter curve in a nutshell, there's this can happen across particular domains. So you might show oil and oil might show up and just the domain that I described, which was technology, resource and economy. But you might also see how it shows up in geopolitics. And it may be that we have to actually go out and say, use our military to sustain the Saudi regime, not because we like them working for their philosophically aligned, but because they have oil. And if we don't have oil, our economy collapses, right? So now we're generating externalities in the environment, right? We're creating pollution. And we're generating externalities and geopolitics, which creates systemic fragility in other places is the point is that as you're creating something, which becomes more and more and more fragile, with more and more and more impact you're setting yourself up for for a bad situation, and you can't back out of it elegantly, right? You're very much having to go forward. 
And so what is happening is, is that barely on some some very rare circumstances is there's enough consciousness and enlightened choice making, to be able to recognize that things are not working out that we need to step back and shift. And maybe that's happened two or three times in human history is a very rare thing. Most of the time, what ends up happening is we run smack into the wall particularly because quite often the decision makers are in a position where they feel like they can actually insulate themselves from the negative consequences. So it's okay to run the hoi polloi, into the wall because we're going be okay. What they don't realize is that they are actually sitting on top of the hoi polloi. And it's all a seamless web. And so what ends up happening is the elites basically drive us right off the cliff, because they don't fully feel the consequences of the choices that they're making. So that's the danger. Another one, which is reinforcing It is something called the Bryce Highsmith model, the two individuals who explained it to me, and it works kind of like this, you have a basically series of phase transitions in Game Theory. 
So, in the beginning, you have a group of individuals who are tightly coherent and are able to maintain their ability to know how the prisoner's dilemma works, but their ability to resolve the prisoner's dilemma by not detecting on each other, that this happens due to very well functioning college justice mechanisms. Meaning people have a felt sense that if they defect, they will have negative consequences. So they feel like they're playing a multiple version of the prisoner's dilemma game, so that if they act badly, the consequences will come back to them. And so they choose to act well, and that generates the global optimum, which is better. And so this group is is thrives, right? So you've got a group that's working well, it can solve collective action problems effectively. And so what happens is that it grows, but it thrives. And so it grows, it brings new people in or expands its population at 10 basis, whoever happens to be. And so you might imagine, let's just make a simple version. The first version is in actual tribe. So this is a tribe and it's relating to nature. And what happens is that as it becomes successful, the tribe expands and it expands, expands and expands until the mechanisms that it originally used to close the loop on justice, to make sure that everybody took responsibility for not defecting, become more and more attenuated until they start to open up little gaps. Some possibilities where I can maybe get away with something and it won't affect, I won't have to bear the full cost or there's some reasonable probability that I won't have to bear the full cost. 
So the game theory starts to shift. So now even imagine that the tribe was relating to nature, but now the tribe has become the niche. So will end up happening is little tiny micro tribes will begin to emerge, who are actually figuring out ways that they can develop local selective advantage themselves, on the body or on the surface of the nation of the society. And so what ends up happening is that criminal gangs, for example, but also bureaucracies and bureaucrats, and a circumstance where I can begin to have a local selective advantage by playing a rule where, from my perspective, what I'm doing is not catastrophic. I'm playing a small one, I'm not bringing down the whole freakin society, all I'm doing is skimming a little bit off the top. And the society doesn't have the capacity to enforce at a high enough level of probability and magnitude. Justice the loop coming back to me then Game theory says that people will begin to play that game.
So the problem is, is that as you begin to do that, it begins to actually create a downward spiral. Meaning that, well, if if you're cheating, and I'm not then I'm losing. And this is the classic is called the multipolar dilemma. It's shows up and all kinds of different stories about collective action problems. classic example might be if we're all fishing from a shared fishing resource, and if we all only fish 100 fish, the resource works great. If we all fish 1000 fish, the resource completely collapses. But if you can get away with fishing 500 fish and I'm only fishing 100 fish, then the resource base survives and you win. That's one that's one example. There's many, many examples. That's one of them. The broader concept is a multi multi polar Trapper multiplier dilemma and it is ubiquitous that could just shows that that's what happens in a context where there are gaps emerge in the ability to enforce justice. Unfortunately, closed loops in defection behaviors. And so what ends up happening is is that the the body of the society continues to endure for a while, because there's generativity involved in just lots of people working together in a culture in society, but the cracks begin to form. And as the cracks form, it drives choice making meaning that the virtuous remember the Game of Thrones, funny, sorry, I have to have to invoke it, the virtuous began to lose under the Starks, and the Lannisters, the Starks live at the border, they live at the border with nature, they live next to the to the wall where winter is so for them, the the reinforcing mechanisms to keep those justice loops close or pretty strong, and so they obey the law. intrinsically remember at the very beginning that was at Ned Stark, the leader said like you have as the King, you must enforce the law yourself. And this is good justice. Go all the way to the center of empire far away from the border, where the Justice loops aren't as as the feedback loops aren't as Stark right You aren't necessarily going to be killed by winter if you're living in King's Landing. 
So now the Lannister is down in King's Landing, they are experts at playing the defection game. They're experts at figuring out how to play the crack. So you can't quite be certain that they're the ones who fucked you over. And so they can get a little bit of an extra win. So if you're not playing the game from that was the phrase in the poker game, to look around the poker table, you don't know who the sucker is, it's you, that comes from this space. So what ends up happening is that everybody begins to either be a stalker, in which case, they're the ones who get their heads cut off, or they have to start being a player. Now, of course, as it's everyone becomes, that's a self reinforcing feedback loop. At that point, if you look around the table, and literally everybody's looking for taking out the sucker except for you, then you're screwed, right, then you're dead. So now you enter into the final stage. The final stage is what they call the fractal defection stage, which is the defection starts to eat the very fabric of what holds the society together. And eventually, the entire thing is, in fact, actually put into jeopardy. You can't trust anyone you can't get anything done. cracy is hyper hypertrophied you have to assume that every interaction is an interaction of multiple layers of manipulation. Coordination costs go through the roof. And again, the whole society collapses from the global optimum to the local optimum of prisoner's dilemma, and boom, you're done. So it's another curve. Right? And so we've got two distinct curves. And that seems like a process that's being sped up by an actor like Trump, who is explicitly going from that perspective, like one of one of Trumps rules is you cannot trust anyone. And so he's he's building that, that narrative into the into the global system.
Well, I think there's two things. First, is I'm going to put an asterisk next to Trump, which is to say that every quite quite often people try to think that they understand him. And so then they reify him into some sort of artifact that I certainly don't know him well enough to be able to say anything specifically about him. What I could do is I can identify a particular character that has certain characteristics. And so that's not a bad story. There's certainly a Trump character who shows up with those characteristics, you might say that he's the the embodiment of a particularly aggressive poker player who's happy to play chaos, right and understands how to thrive in chaos. And fundamentally is kind of peak predator effect, fractal defection land. That's just where he comes from. And so for him, it's intuitive and sensible that one behaves in this fashion, and therefore is very effective in this stage. Right? It's, you know, the Lannisters outcompete the Starks, until chaos actually happens, right until winter actually comes it's actually better to be a Lannister than a stark in King's Landing. And so, but then this is the point that makes it accelerate the process. You know, again, the it's actually Sorry, I think you may be pointed out something separate, which is equally important. If I am of that sort, if I'm playing that kind of game It's in my interest to make sure the game is of that sort. So I actually have an interest to break the Justice links to make things more chaotic because I thrive in that niche. I thrive in chaos, I don't thrive in order in order, I might in fact be called out and and hung from the nearest tree. So I actually need to spin more chaos because that's where I thrive. So yes, you've got both my activities make more chaos. But then even intentionally, I've invested interest in increasing the amount of chaos just because that's what I'm good at. So that's an example of the second curve, then we've got other curves. Let's take for example, the the exponential technology curve. One of the interesting characteristics about exponential curves is that they go to infinity. As far as we know, we don't have the ability to go to infinity in say, processing power, which means that at some point, they have to actually stop being exponential, they have to be some kind of an S curve. Or by the way, just a straight drop. So when we take a look at where we are in the exponential on the table, knology curve, we're getting into pretty significant exponentials we're doing some very powerful things. And one, it is for sure the case that at some point in the not too distant future, by that I might mean 100 years or 1000 years, we reach the end of that exponential, if you sort of for project Moore's Law, multiply by the amount of bt use per unit processing power, and you get to the point where the computational energy on the planet generates enough entropy to evaporate the entire atmosphere, for example, or the atomic boundary of quantum mechanics can't actually produce anymore for advancement. So it's a curve that has a certain characteristic.
But let me talk about the variation what happens in that context. So let's go back to Game Theory. So I have I'm playing. I'm playing game to win, and you're playing a game to win. And when this the way this game works is is it's a zero sum. So if I win, you lose, if you win, I lose. So this shows up a lot, right? So if we're playing that kind of games game, a certain characteristic. Now in this game, I have a strong incentive to become more effective. Because otherwise I lose, and you have a strong incentive to, so one of us is going to be able to be more effective than the other, and we're going to be the winner. Now, if it's not a catastrophic way, I mean, if I don't extinguish you, if I don't kill you, if you're still in the game, then you have a really strong incentive to be very exploratory and hard to figure out some novel way to route around me. And we see this happening. For example, in capitalism, this is one of the virtues of capitalism uses this mechanism to drive innovation. So if my company outcompetes, your company, your company, the Iser is going out of business, or has to be more innovative. But what that does is that is what pushes us along the innovation curve, so increases the exponential increases the rate of that exponential. Now, all is well and good except for a couple of things. One is, as we're engaging in conflict with each other We're creating some sort of externalities, right? We're producing some kind of waste energy into the system. It might be that just the simple act of producing goods and services generates pollution and stuff like that. Or it may be that how I market my product into the marketplace creates a jams, the sense making systems that human beings used to figure out what a good choices for themselves doesn't matter. Like fill in the blank, there's some nonzero externality that is produced. And you kind of multiply that by the power, the magnitude of what we're doing. So if what we're doing is gathering sticks to create fire that has one level of externality, if what we're doing is nuclear power that has another level of externalities much larger one potentially very significant. Well, what moving along the exponential tech curve means is increasing our power. So as we move further and further to the up the curve which we have to because of the competitive dynamic, one of the things that we intrinsically do is we increase the risks associated with the magazine power that we're playing with. 
So for example, very concretely, right now we're in a situation where, say crisper cast nine has taken the nightmares of germ and genetic warfare. There were just nightmares in the 1970s. Second 1970s, we had this concern that we might engineer super viruses, or we might engineer different kinds of super toxins. And realistically, only a handful of nation states had the technical capacity to do something like that. And they're able to contain that. Well, now with crisper cast nine, in the next two decades or so, a reasonably well funded multinational corporation will have that capacity. And in the decade after that, and anything big like exponential would be a high school chemistry class will have that level of capacity. Well, just stochastic risk means that somebody somewhere is going to fuck it up. So we're talking about massive consequences could just get the magnitude of power and increasing fragility. You know, even a small deviation back in 1900, the totality of all of humanity. If we all made terrible choices really couldn't meaningfully threaten the species, the worst wars we'd ever fought had barely been a blip in population growth. Even World War Two and all this ferocity was not meaningfully significant in the total survivability of the species. Click past the invention of the nuclear bomb, and then the hydrogen bomb, and then multipolar hydrogen bombs. And suddenly, we're in a situation where for the first time in the history of history, we did in fact, have the capacity to kill everybody, or at least, mostly everybody.
And in that case, it only required that two people affirmatively choose not to push a button at the same time to avoid that problem. So we qualitatively shifted from one place where we couldn't possibly hurt ourselves to a place where we could, but still, it was a relatively easy thing to do, and we barely made it. We barely made it past that threshold. And now what's happening is that as we're moving up that exponential curve, the magic To power continues to increase becomes decentralized, it gets pushed further and further out to more and more empowered groups, smaller groups. And therefore we're moving into a state where in the not too distant future, effectively everybody is going to have to be enormously wise and skillful to avoid creating catastrophic consequences. So it's another curve. So the point is that we've got a lot of curves. And we can actually take very small curves, like the Hubble curve with with oil reserves, we can look bigger curves like the tainter curve, the price hikes, how does how does myth model, or we can look at the fundamental curve, like this relationship between game theoretic rivalrous dynamics and exponential technology and how that relates to fragility. But all of these are kind of pointing in the same direction, which is that there's something about the nature of how we do civilization now, that is leading us to a circumstance where fragility is being built into the system at many, many different layers.

Chris 25:52  
And you've also talked about the way that the dialogue is going, the increased polarization of the dialogue is We're we're staking out ideological positions that are very difficult for us to, to communicate with the other side.

Jordan 26:06  
Well, this is both a cause and a symptom. So let's take a look at it from the point of view of being a cause. Easy enough, right? If I am playing a political game to win, then I am incentivized to generate a sent a set of signals stories that create a maximum intensity of separation between my group and other groups. So long as my groups the biggest expense of having gv the natural in a winner take all democracy, where 51% wins everything. There's a maximum incentive to generate a narrative that creates a strongly bound group. And of course, with this almost always implies is to create a strong about group that has a natural entity and typically to some other set of groups or even national instead of decreed strongly opposition groups. And then what happens is, is that it'll sort of tend to orbit around 50%. Another side because that's power shifts back and forth. But then it will tend to polarize. Because that's just the natural dynamics that if I'm the more polar, the guys in the middle end up getting dropped out, because the binding agent of extreme threat is stronger than the binding agent of extreme reasonableness, under most circumstances. And this is not a logical law. This is more of a human, social, socio political law. But we've noticed this and actually happens all the time. We see it happen all over the place. And it's happening right now for sure. Where, in a level that I think, these days, I don't even have to speak about it. Theoretically, most people I think, are aware of the fact that there's a trend in their lived experience, where the polarization of the language is increasing over time, and it's self reinforcing. I mean, honestly, like at this point in the US, you either are where it was right? We're putting us this is the most recent one up. So if you're on the right, that means that you have blood on your hands because you support gun rights and therefore effectively have pulled the trigger on killing millions of people and simultaneously are effectively a interested in is fully supporting and directly engaging in genocide against immigrants. And this is this is the level of the rhetoric, right it's not level of rhetoric of I disagree with you on immigration policy level of rhetoric rhetoric is that you are comparable to the worst things that have ever happened in human history, because of your beliefs. And, of course, the the opinion is symmetric, meaning that if you're on the left, you are a radical, completely insane. And what is it liberalism is a mental illness completely insane? authoritarian, hell bent on simultaneously engendering genocide against this case. White people. And for sure unborn children of all races, by the way. So you're actually realistic in that sense. It has to do with essentially Neil ism, essentially you are fundamentally designed to hurt and kill yourself. And in the process of doing that you are doing it at the broader social level. So it's really treason.

Chris 29:18  
Why is it gotten so worse now? Is it social media?

Jordan 29:21  
Well, again, I think there's actually a number of different forces at play. But let's focus on the last one that you just mentioned. So one of the things that's not often enough, contemplated, and therefore worth talking about, is the fact that we're, we're in the middle of a major transition in media infrastructure. And that has a lot of impact as a lot of consequences. So the legacy media infrastructure and by the way, when I say media infrastructure, I literally mean the way that as a group as a society, we are able to collectively make sense of what's going on in the world and then inform ourselves About what choices to make. So it used to be broadcast still is mostly but very much used to be only by broadcast. I mean something like some small group of individuals, maybe even just one have authority to speak. And everybody else has the responsibility of listening. So whether that's a teacher at the head of a class where it's a newscaster broadcasting over TV, there's this relationship of small number of speakers, large number of listeners, and in no inner communication, right. So even if I'm listening came and asked questions, I could just listen. And as a modality of communication, and if sense making this has certain effectiveness, if you do a very, very good job of empowering the people to speak, who speak, then they're saying the right things. And so you want the most competent, most honest, most clear headed most thoughtful individuals to be empowered. You want them to be credentialed, you want some sort of mechanism to credential identify them, you give them the speaker, they speak and everybody else gets the best information. That's actually not bad. We can go into, like some into some depth on what the limitations of that approach are, and, and how it can actually end up being disrupted and hijacked, which of course it has. But for the moment, let's just say, okay, that's what it has been for a long time. And this has implications for how individuals show up, psychologically, developmentally, as a child, we're very plastic. 
And so as we're emerging, we're looking around our environment trying to figure out well, how do we what do we do? How are we successful, and if the way that you're successful is either you get really good at listening, understanding what the right beliefs are, and then executing on them effectively, that's how you get rewarded, you get the A plus on the test by doing it that way. Or you figure out how to climb the ladder and being credential so you get to be the one to speak. Right, that that's what success looks like, then that's the kind of psychological model that you'll develop as a human most of the time and this something's wrong with you and you can't ride that elevator. And so you end up with a self reinforcing system where the the topology the overall media, constructs this dynamic and then the developmental psychology deconstructs people who are adapted to that environment, so they reinforce it on themselves. Now you shift, obviously, for the past 20 years in an accelerating curve, we've been moving into a completely different kind of media topology that a peer to peer network on the internet behaves completely differently. And no longer has this model where, by physical nature, a small number, are the only ones who can speak and everyone else must listening cannot communicate back has a completely different nature. It's more like our conversation, right? I speak in this case, more, you speak to the right need to go to ask questions, you can direct the conversation, we're actually in a conversation. And so this is a different topologies different relationship with power, and also requires a different adaptive behavior, right? So we can maybe get into that in a bit and what that looks like. But the thing that you're calling out is the fact that we're in the middle. We're in a spot where the old structure still largely controls, most psychologies and most the primary Institutions of power. What do you call the blue church, what I've called the blue church, exactly. The new structure is emergent, right? It's coming up from the bottom, it's happening all over the place. And they're struggling. It's just a conflict. It's a conflict at the level of sense making, it's a conflict of the level of what kind of psychologists are adaptive is the comfort to the level of who gets to speak. And therefore the messages are fractured and broken up all over the place. And of course, this is chaos. And so then we get kind of cycle back to maybe the Trump phenomenon, that when chaos emerges, the particular approaches they're very good at playing in chaos, will tend to be more successful that approaches that are better at playing in order. For example, in a celebrated essay for medium after the Trump election of 2016 green hole described how a new online red religion was attacking the consensus liberal reality.
The blue church talked about the blue church and the red religion as an insurgency against the blue church. Where we're at, well, so since we have a little bit of opportunity to be more explicit, I want to make sure to break a few things out. So identified a couple of distinct, let's call them entities, they may not necessarily be self consciously identifying as entities, but they're collaborative. They work together for some set of reasons. So whether they're happening be working together, de facto or intentionally is irrelevant. So there's at least three, one I'm going to call the establishment and the establishment, you might think it was just the the inertial consequences of like, builds more like, right, so if I go to school at Harvard, then I meet other people who are at school at Harvard. And the people who graduated before me also into Harvard, maybe I met them too, because of the way the school sets up relationships. When I come out of school, I'm in a situation where have social bonds, pretty strong social bonds, and the strongest that we form in our current society with people I went to school with, and they're going to various locations where they have Vertical relationships with former classmates that give them some advantage. So what's happened is that basically very simple vector, I'm more likely to achieve authority and power because of this particular moment, this particular social environment, run that over 100 years, which is more or less the timeframe that we're talking about here, hundred 50 years or so. And you have an establishment you have a group of individuals who have been in relationship with each other that are relatively tightly connected. And as human beings are want to do tend to relate in a fashion which is coordinated with each other. They have similar sensibilities, they have similar values, they kind of like each other because they're friends, they hang out in the same places. 
And so they kind of coordinate and work together. They certainly influence each other enormously, because you can only listen to so many people, and you really care about people who are socially connected, right? So if your sister's husband is the current head of NBC, and you're the current head of Harvard, then he's gonna care what you think you're gonna care what he thinks. Because your in laws, and by the way, you're both in established positions of authority, which means that you have high credentials to be important. Right? So that's just the established. The second one is the deep state. Right? The Deep State, which is astounding me, which is I think, what, five, seven years ago, that would have been almost nobody would have had that language in that concept. Now, almost everybody does, which is a good indication that this something's happening, right. The Deep State is kind of playing out the establishment narrative, but now talking about it in the terms of institutional structures. So, if I'm a lifer at the CIA, and you're a lifer at the FBI, there's some likelihood that we have interacted with each other more than one or two times during our timeframe. And if she's alive for at the IRS, then that happens too. Right. So same basic idea. There's a continuity of relationship where I have beginning to build sort of an institutional loyalty to a set of what is this local culture? The CIA has a culture The FBI has a culture the US military has it called There's many different cultures. And by the way, all the corporations that have military, industrial government relationships do to myself. I'm a 30 year executive at Exxon. But I've also done five stints at the Department of Energy, because that's how it works. 
These things begin to bind, right? So that forms its own relationship. You got the establishment, you got the deep state, they're very connected, but they're not exactly the same thing. And by the way, there are many other structures that are in the environment as well, those aren't the only two, then you've got the deep church and the deep church to conceptualize that you have to think about it at a higher level of abstraction. It's more of a psychological type, and a way of being and doing it which I described earlier. But to recapitulate, there's a notion of there being some very small number of people who are authorized speakers. The nature of speech goes from small number to almost everybody, large broadcast, and it's one way there's no interactivity and to become credentials is an authorized speakers a very powerful place to be. By the way, you could either get that by being a member establishment the deep state or by being a celebrity, which is an odd artifact of broadcast media. So that complex, those three together, hang together more or less loosely as this phenomenon, right. So it's not just the blue church. But now if we want to refer to all of that is the blue church we can but just be mindful and I said the blue church Rameen is more of the process that gives rise to a particular way of making sense and making choices and reinforcing that as a social field. So then, in contrast to that this emergent dynamic, this new phenomenon.
So I characterize that as differentially as the insurgency, and also as the red religion, and then also as the decentralized medium. So let's take it as two peers. Think about the blue church that maps to the decentralized media. So I have a different media topology and different psychological type ology that gives rise to different abilities to send intelligence Different kinds of stories that are going to be upregulated mean magic, right mean magic is over here. Talking Heads and classic propaganda is over here. Me magic is over here. And they are very different and how they're shaped and who shapes them and how they show up. Now, under here, the deep state in the establishment have optimized for the blue church, right? That's how you're successful is to become the ones who have the ability to speak, to become the ones who have credentials and become the ones who have control over other kinds of broadcasts costs, style, bureaucratic institutions, like pass the EPA, smoking, people get past the law, everybody has to follow the law. Over here, we have chaos. We have a new niche that is opened up, and nobody has figured out how to master it perfectly. So now it's wide open. Now it turns out that if you're doing this, well, you're not going to play that game. Why would you play a new game, if the old game works really well, and you're the expert at your control of this game. So the people over here are kind of the heterogenous or the mark In this case, the losers of the last culture were which is broadly the right, conservatives. And so one way of naming the alt right, which is semantically confusing, which is to say, the people who originally coined the term, the alt right, are one group. The way the alt right is presented in this blue church narrative is another one. I'm about to present a third, and maybe problematic, because it's gonna be confusing. But the idea is, it's it's the way that these particular characteristics of conservativism at a level of personality type and a level of core values have begun to discover and Rico here on this new framework. Or we can just call it the insurgency. And this is the new right, the new group of individuals and institutions that are forming over here that are very different, and they're just a different set of sensibilities.

Chris 40:57  
So now, where are we on that process?

Jordan 41:01  
I articulated this narrative, I guess right after the 2016 election in point of fact, actually articulated several years before, but most notably right after the election, and described it in terms of here's a bunch of fronts of what we might think of as a war, they're gonna be playing out. There's the front of the level of the mass media is the front of the level of the deep state, the friendslist level of globalism. And this the front of the most fundamental level, which is a conflict between how we do collective intelligence, broadcast style versus decentralized style. And honestly, I feel like the things that played out pretty much as described First, the insurgency, both formally through the Trump administration, and informally through the kind of cluster of human beings who are gathering under this new medium have overtly identified the mass media as fake news. Right. That was the point where with Jim Acosta, I think recently yelled while you know, when will you stop asking the American people to call it the Enemy of the People or whatever happens to be right. So it's now we're now in the point where it is part of the consciousness that the mass media is an enemy. Now, you may agree with it or not agree with it, but it's in the consciousness, right in a way that it wasn't 510 15 years ago. I mean, it was in some level rush limbaugh has been saying this for a while, but now it is the narrative. And I think the most recent polls show that something like 75% of Americans believe that the media is engaged in either overt manipulation or reckless propaganda. So it's sunk in. And we should just say that the structures are decreasingly credible. And their effectiveness is I think, rather obviously, becoming less and less, has less less traction. So that's one front. And I expect that to continue to accelerate, because I've noticed that they have a really abysmal strategic sense. So they keep to just seem to keep punching themselves in the face and expect them to keep doing so. So let's go check. 
The natural drift is away From mass media to decentralized media anyway, because the technological technological shift is going there. And we're also seeing it happen at the level of kind of psychological attention and credibility. So then the second layer is the layer between the Deep State and the insurgency. And of course, this is also playing out, right, we've seen the conflict happening at the at the top of the FBI. We also see it playing out in the DOJ and the State Department, all the sort of usual suspects. I don't think we have much visibility of what's going on in say, the CIA or the NSA. That's because they're secret. But it seems pretty evident that a conflict is occurring. That is between what we would very clearly identify as the deep state, the people who are in the highest levels of some of the primary institutions, particularly the level of law enforcement and investigation, which is always going to try to decapitate the deep state, that's where I'd start. And it's more or less being successful, right, they're beginning to be moved out. Now of course, the deep state is deep and is large is powerful. So I don't think that we can call that one just yet. But I would say right now that if I had to estimate, it is substantially further along in the was like the soccer game world cup. So the insurgencies ahead to 202 to nil, and we're probably the 75 minute mark. So that each state is going to have to start innovating quite significantly if they want to figure out how to make up that lost ground and re establish themselves. And part of the problem, of course, is that the deep state is seems to have been unwisely continuing to believe that it's believed to control the mass media is a powerful lever is not recognized and it's in fact punching itself in the face by doing that, and it doesn't realize that it hasn't got the right loop the ability to respond quickly to changes in the game and so it just keeps executing on old strategies just like the the the apocryphal Polish cavalry charging the German tanks. Cavalry used to gas, we get it. It's not going to work in this work, the words change.
So I continue to expect that the insurgency will win this conflict now. But not massive, maybe 60% probability. Then the third front, which is the front that shows up as the new nationalism versus globalism. Again, same basic idea. It's clearly a front. I think that's pretty straightforward. And it's clearly progressing in that direction. And the Italy and the EU continues to have chunks of the EU shift from at least you may European, which in fact, is actually also globalist, to nationalist and that seems to be accelerating that disorder. I mean, look, the Paul didn't win in France, but she did. Almost right you got in the zone. I think Merkel is right now, you know, challenge so the energy seems to continue to be moving in the direction of some new form. nationalism, which is control globalism. And of course, since the United States has been the primary agent of globalism, to the degree to which the United States is now moving in the exact opposite direction, that's really tough. Like the globalist institutions don't have a lot of ability to enforce themselves on national institutions. Absent, you could actually control the national institution national institutions directly. So, barring some scenario where things are more odd than they seem, which is plausible, I mean, certainly, there's many, many possible scenarios I'm describing one. That one is going to continue to basically be derivative of the first two with a vector in the direction away from globalism and towards increasing multipolar nationalism. And then the last which is the most important and the most fundamental by far, which is the shift of the balance of power from the media structures of broadcast and the blue church, to this new set of media structures that are decentralized and again, That continues to move. We talked about the idea I mentioned it, to me magic, that has moved from being a thing that a very small group of individuals used almost tongue in cheek to think that it's almost becoming a discipline. I would not be surprised to see like a university course on me magic anytime soon. Or at least an online online course. And that makes sense. Because just every day more and more attention, just straight up, attention is moved to this new framework. And more and more people are aware to the visceral level, that the styles and approaches and people that are most fundamentally associate with the blue church don't work. law for lots of reasons, like they don't feel like they work. They feel incompetent, or inauthentic. And these new voices, I think you've talked a lot about the intellectual darkweb are showing up almost surprisingly but there's Showing up surprisingly, for this reason, which is that there is a new possibility, because effectively what we're seeing is the breakdown.

Chris 48:08  
The breakdown of this ideological structure.

Jordan 48:11  
Yeah, effectively. Yeah, this is actually a really hard question. So let me see if I can get a shout out. So let me see if I can try to articulate it.
Well, we'll see. So we talked about the way that the broadcast works with it feels much let's just use actually school schools a nice example because everybody's, most people have been in school. So the way the broadcast works is there's there's a person in authority, and that authority has two primary characteristics. One is they're the one who gets to speak. And they're the one who knows what the right answers are. And so they hold good opinion. And they commit and their job is to convey good and good opinions here. share with you what is in fact, the right thing to think. And your job, the audience, the student is to learn, and be able to deploy good opinion, whatever it may be right now. In a very well functioning version of this good opinion includes critical thinking. But it's kind of a weird dynamic, where the psychological, the part of the brain, the way that you're actually interacting with the brain that is associated with this style of information transfer is dissonant with critical thinking. So it's like, Do as I say, not as I do. think critically, think critically. What did I just tell you to do? think critically, right. I'm actually training. What I'm actually trying to do is not to think critically, regardless of how much I say that I am. In fact, regardless of how much information I convey to you about how to think critically, right, the way you learn how to think critically is not by being taught. Another thing, Chris, by thinking critically in reality in practice and learning how to really feel in yourself, when does something feel off and okay with uncertainty and feel okay with uncertainty, but our actual academic environment and say under the regime of standardized tests, as an example, under the regime of it's a competitive landscape to be the one or two people who get to go to the good college thing and get the good job like this. So under the, like, the evolution into the education is operated in the States, the regime of standardized tests. So we want to be able to be sure that the school is doing a good job. So we create a test. And what that does does, of course, is it begins to make it so that students want to optimize against that test, particularly test as color the essay t, where you have to get a good score on the inside teams, you want to get into a good college and if you get a good college to really get a good job and but we have to get a good job to be able to simultaneously live a good life and to be a good person kind of story. 
So this creates a gradient right, Chris, competitive landscape where you have to optimize against what are the characteristics necessary to do well in these various substance, simple tests, whether it's a particular style of brain style of mind, or you have to be able to very quickly and with high fidelity, be able to access information and respond with the right information. Effectively, right? It's computational minds, information processing mind. And information processing mind isn't the same kind of money is able to do save creative thought or critical thinking is different style of brain. Many people who have criticized education have been pointing this out. This is not me. Anyway. So we use the concept we use the term ideology. What I'd like to propose is that ideology is nothing but a pre existing manifold of information that somebody somewhere not you has largely constructed and has been presented to you as a preformed menu. And it's some list of stuff that orients what is right and true, and your job is to receive it. Figure out where you are on that list and then choose one of the choices that's associated with Exactly like a computer program. And so an ideology is how to run like a computer program. And it may be a very sophisticated ideology that has all kinds of if then statements and branches. So it has a lot of ability to process complex environments to some level of effectiveness. But nonetheless, you're thinking like a computer, which is quite distinct from thinking like a human, for example, creatively, intuitively. And so the blue church construct, as a construct, tends to prefer and generate this style of thinking. And you think again, about how it shows up in school, who raises their hand first, who has the right answer quickly, who's able to respond very perfectly exactly what the teacher said, if you're the student who maybe has a different idea about how things should be done, and you're maybe we're asking a lot of questions. You're probably not familiar with having a lot of success in school. It's quite likely that you experience yourself as somehow losing in some way that was mysterious. And that's the point, right? It's not necessarily the intent. It's the nature of how this thing reinforces Just like an evolutionary nature just reinforces a certain set of behaviors and strategies.
And this shows up all over the place. So think about the glibness of how things show up in news or in politics. Right? If news and politics it's all about being able to, it's almost like, stand up comedy, right, the job is to be able to say the thing that is the BB or the gotcha, or the framework that delivers the emotional payload, it's already sort of been pre arranged in the computer program. You're playing a game, you're playing a computer game, that's all you're doing in that computer game, just like any other computer game has a series of states and has a series of moves. And remember that old game I think it's called kings quest or Dragon Quest where it was a super stupid is like as a cinema cinematic would play and you just had four moves up, down, left, right, and your only job was to watch the cinematic and go, you know the right direction. It's like that level of stupidity. So then what happens is is the two distinct dynamics simultaneously One is when you move into this new framework in this new decentralized medium, it requires a completely different kind of mind. That kind of mind doesn't work particularly well. And the kind of mind that it requires is very different requires a mind that can actually think, requires a mind that isn't only able to be a receiver, but is able to actually be available to be both the receiver and the sender, everyone is roughly empowered to be able to, to express as well as to receive. And so you have to complete different set of capacities instead of being able to listen record with extremely high fidelity, precisely the semantic structure that was presented to you identify what context indicate that's the semantic structure to respond with. And then when confronted with those submit those environments, to respond with that, like a computer program. Your job is to be able to actually discern what is actually a thoughtful response to what's happening here. 
In an arbitrary environment, it can be completely novel, how to learn how to think, and, and then how to convey with as much clarity and fidelity as you can. Now that's the optimal functioning. I should mention, by the way that in just the same with their ways to hack the blue church structure, their ways to hack this decentralized structure. And we've seen them various kinds of trolls and, and means are the ways to disrupt this to precisely to read, which is actually very important, precisely to the degree that the decentralized collective intelligence hasn't yet reached a level of self capability to be able to make sense on its own basis. It is catastrophic Lee vulnerable to these kinds of attacks. The blue church model can't do anything about me magic. It's completely vulnerable to that approach. And the emergent collective intelligence is basically a child. It's an infant and So it can be attacked by this approach. However, to the degree to which a critical mass of individuals reach a capacity to have the right kind of characteristics to actually be able to participate in a peer to peer fashion on this front, they then generate a collective intelligence which is completely invulnerable to the sets of attacks. So you've kind of gone through adaptive Valley you've escaped the blue church, you've gone through the desert of meme warfare, you come out the other end with something which is categorically cape more capable of sense making and categorically anti fragile to this entire set of attacks. In fact, almost all forms of fake news are cannot be fully parsed by this new kind of collective intelligence does not exist yet not collective intelligence.
No one knows what I'm saying. It doesn't yet exist. So what ends up happening is that we've got a a dysfunctional because it's breaking down it has blindspots old form of collective intelligence, and dysfunctional because it has not yet been constructed new form of collective intelligence and we we're witnessing the middle. So this new form is just strong enough to wreak havoc on the old structure. And yet, so weak that it can't stand on its own two feet. And so that's sort of exactly where we are. I should mentioned, by the way that we should also be a mature enough to destroy windows. Yeah. And of course, the structure is a lot easier. The creation is a very good, very good way of putting it. In fact, in some sense, it can't help but destroy it. Because the the structures of sense making of the old structure don't make sense. They're really good sense making. 
It's, you know, I think Brett has this idea of metaphorical truth. Let's call it something like useful lies. You know, it's it's a, here's a reality complex, rich, nuanced, multifarious, multi variant, etc. Let me sort of construct a relatively simplistic narrative that kind of describes it enough to be okay. And as long as we all Sort of accept this, we can coordinate. That's the way the blue church operates. It's kind of like the way that G fabricates an organizational structure. I don't want you as a whole person. I want the vice president marketing aspects of you, which are kind of fungible, like the Vice President of Marketing aspects, aspects of you aren't that different from the vice president marketing aspects of the 50 people next year, right, you have a certain set of raw capacities that I've designed an organization to be able to interact with, regardless of the human involved set of an industrial model, or a mass production model. And the blue Church has to do that with everything that's reproduce all concepts into relatively simple ideological frameworks. Not sensitive to nuance, and so they're not real, they're not actually complex. And so it ends up happening is that as a new kind of intelligence emerges, that has the ability to see that this isn't actually rich, it cannot help but be corrosive to it. Now in the beginning, it shows up as as insane as going to show up is not having any ability to start What's going on. And so it's going to be up regulating all kinds of craziness, which is why conspiracy theories are going through the roof.
Because it's like if you imagine somebody who just got their spinal cord severed, and they're trying to figure out how to retrain their spinal cord, the signals that are coming down are all crazy, it hasn't figured how to actually turn that back into signal. So it, it can very effectively critique the structures of the blue church sends out, but it can't yet actually create really high quality sense. And we should be clear, I said member I mentioned earlier, this is a psychological thing as well. I'm not talking about we're going to be the same kinds of psychologists and others out of the boards, not like people who are blue church psychologists are suddenly gonna jump over here and things will just look kind of the same but better. No, no, it's going to be very different. The way that ideas form, and the nature of how concepts show up, like the idea of transparency medic mind if you're new with that idea. So we have a story of a Thomas Kuhn, who coined the term paradigm, structure of scientific revolutions. So when he talked about it was sort of a linearity of paradigms, we have the Newtonian paradigm. And it works until it gets to the point where there's a bunch of edge cases that it can't figure out. People like what's going on here. And some people want to be conservative and defend the paradigm and kind of ignore the the anomalies and other people grasp the anomalies. And it meant a whole bunch of crazy ideas until a couple of those crazy ideas turned out to be not so crazy. And then you get a collapse of the old paradigm and the transformation to a new paradigm. And that's cool story, we may be on that process. And maybe the blue church is a paradigm and this new thing, this decentralized medium is a new paradigm. My proposition is that it's actually a meta phenomenon, which is to say that it's meta two paradigms in general, that the entire concept of a paradigm is a thing that emerges inside a structure like the blue church. That's a model of how you make sense.
Where you have a schema, right? A paradigm is nothing but a schema of what are good epistemological rules. What does truth look like? And what ethical rules was good Look like what are the good? What are the true how we know what we see them, then we can sort of bind them very cleanly. In this new environment we're going to be I propose them sort of in hypothetical land and making predictions, running in different kind of mind, transparent America mind, one that's able to instantiate a micro paradigm under particular local conditions, that has adapted to the local environment, but isn't identified with that paradigm. And so that it can jump out of that paradigm allow this to dissolve and instantiate a new one, or possibly even running two or three differentially, just like modern portfolio theory in finance, where I no longer have to have sort of a particular investment strategy, I can abstract that to a portfolio strategies and I can keep abstracting up to a portfolio portfolio is a portfolio portfolios. At a certain point, I get to a trans portfolio concept, which operates at a completely different information dynamic.
So the  phenomena of the intellectual darkweb, for example, seems to have arisen in in opposition to this idea of the blue church. This idea of what we have is an ideology. G and A, an ideology in the media and an ideology in in culture that maybe wasn't truly visible. But the eruption of sort of the intellectual dark web is shown that there is an ideology. And this is sort of a movement that is just showing up the flaws and the ideology. And that in some sense, there's a religion. And you described it in our interview really well, it's like, what the blue Church has done is taken the idea the values of openness, and replace them with a with an ideology around openness. So you have a certain set of things related to openness that you have to believe to actually be within the confines of the blue church. 

Chris 1:02:30
Right. So it's kind of a religious mindset some ways.

Jordan 1:02:42  
Well, I mean, now we're going to have to be very careful, because the term religion is not clear. What I've noticed I actually wrote about this recently, as I've noticed in that dialogue and discovering what's going on by wrote it for the purposes of finding out okay, what I didn't respond to this Is that the term religion seems to have actually been complexified? for good reasons, actually, by the way, to include a number of other kinds of things that it is not. At least three. One is mysticism, mysticism and religion are not the same. If your religion is mystical, then it's doing the wrong thing. By the way, if your mysticism is religious, it's doing the wrong thing. Another spirituality, religion and spirituality are also not the same. And then there's science. And when we might say, quite obviously, religion is not science, but the point is that sometimes those two lines have crossed and vice versa. So my propositions images are defined these domains and propositions one is that these domains are all real. They're all by the way necessary to any well functioning human civilization. And that problematics arise when we cross domains. We have one of them trying to do the other one's job. All we have institutional structures, the cross domains and end up mixing them. So, for example, a lot of the problem that arose in the West was that the church, the Catholic Church probably was doing both religion, religion, spirituality, mysticism, and science all in a single institutional container, and ended up crossing a lot of those domains. So let me define them. This is worthwhile. So in the context of science, what we mean is the loop process, where we have a model of reality, we then compare that to experiments of reality, for the purposes of updating that model. That's it. That's science, science is the process of having a model and using experiments to verify that models a good fit to reality. It exists for the purpose of having good models with which to operate in reality. By the way, technology is the inverse of that knowledge is the use of good models of reality to generate actions that are effective in reality, right, so if I have a model of, if science gives me a model of ballistics, I can then apply that model of ballistics to build ballistic missiles. So those two things fit together quite nicely. Spirituality is very different. And it has nothing to do with models at all has to do with embodiment with living. And we might see the spirituality is the way that an individual is able to achieve integration congruence with self and then to be able to enter into relationships with world that are able to be integrated into self. 
Right, so I am how do I come in to be able to be in relationship with myself where I am fully integrated and congruent? And then as I go through life and have experiences, how am I able to ingest those experiences to make those experiences still part of a fully integrated self, right, how do I avoid being traumatized by my experiences? How do I avoid becoming disassociated as a consequence of my relationship with my experience was being competent myself, that is spirituality and as the the essence of what that process is religion, then is kind of the community correlate? It's how does self entrench relationship with other selves to form communities? And then how do communities enter into relationship with world so as to be able to be adaptive to and thrive in world? Right. So it's the the embodied practices that give rise to enduring communities. And that is religion as a function. Now notice what happens that when we run into problems, so let's imagine that we have these embodied practices, which are embodied practices, they're not stories, we tell the stories, to be able to help us understand and to convey and to reinforce the embodied practices. But if we think the stories are where the truth lives, and not the practices, we've now crossed the domains, we're now being to treat religion like science because the stories are a model. If you're not living your religion, if it's not actually embodied in your life, you're doing it a great disservice and yourself a great disservice in your Community great to service. And then of course you can even worse because we then what can happen is you can then try to actually do science from religion, you can try to actually tell stories about reality about the world. And then of course what you do, because if your experiments with the world don't inform the stories, do you then use it to change your body practices? 
That seems like it's not going to be very effective because your body practices have nothing to do with that you're crossing the line in the wrong direction. So what I'd like to do is demystify this damn thing, that there's a thing religion that has an incredibly important purpose, that sometimes we might, oddly enough, some people thought, Well, why don't you call it ideology? At which point I refer back to the definition of ideology. ideology is what happens when science tries to do religion, it creates a model of how people ought to live in community then tries to impose that model on how people operate. Many The way to do things is very good reasons why that can never work. It has to do with relationship between the complex and the complicated. Or why don't you just call it culture? Are you just describing cultures and that culture and of course, the difference is that Culture is what you are doing. Religion is the doing this in a way so as to achieve a particular consequence. So religion is the process by which we develop a thriving and enduring culture. Well, that's not just the same thing as culture, you might have a shitty culture and that's not the same thing. Religion is a vector. It's an it's an orientation, a movement, just like spirituality is not the same thing as just being a person. Spirituality is a process whereby we try to achieve integration of self with self and the relationship of self with world. Okay, then you have mysticism. Right now religion quite often crosses the streams with mysticism, which is very problematic, because obviously, what's happening now is they're trying to create either that becomes a variation of mystifying science or becomes a notion. Well, let me just talk about mysticism it becomes religion, over coding mysticism, and mysticism is the hardest. I haven't got a lot of clarity on this yet, but let me try it. It has to do with the pure realization of self with self? How do we actually become clear in self? So as opposed to how do we become integrated self in relationship with world to spirituality? 
mysticism is like, I think shows up mostly in practices like meditation, where you're not trying to relate self to world at all. You're just trying to get complete clarity on the nature of self on, for example, here's a concrete version of mysticism, oddly enough, what are your values? What are your values? What are your the actual basis of your values that kind of go deep into you? Not necessarily. No, not at all. What are your values in the context of living? What are the values are actually at the depth of you, they give rise to you and their their orientation relationship, that'd be like a properly mystical relationship. And it's mysterious, because it has it is deep. And the only way you can get access to it is to actually get really good at listening to things that don't have structure. They're not coming from the outside world at all. They're entirely internal What Of course, what happens is these things relate to each other, to the degree to which I'm able to achieve clarity of relationship to self amela, Chief clarity to the nature of how that stuff works, well, then I can use that in my spirituality. So Mrs. Meditation is a good practice to have as a basis of a spiritual practice. through it, they're distinct, or they're not the same thing a spiritual practice may rely on clarity of self to achieve integration of self and relationship with world. And similarly, religion is a good basis to do science. Right? You can't do science very well to say if you're in a culture that doesn't tell the truth. Everybody's a liar. Science is very, very dysfunctional, or religion is about how do you actually build people who tell the truth? How do you actually create the embodied practices like child rearing is a religious function? How do you actually raise good people? 
What are the practices and traditions and rituals that give rise to that they can only really will so far at least be developed in evolution time, meaning in relationship with lineage that goes over a long period of time, this is the thing that Jordan Peterson is I think, most coaches Really trying to articulate in that space. Our archetypes are mythologies, the ones that cover a lot of cultures and last a long time, do so because they are the things that have been most deeply associated with what is fucking worked. And those cultures that do certain things, in certain ways endure, and we perceive them as stories. So we can, we can listen to them. But it's not the stories that matters, the embodied practices, if you're not living it, you're not doing the religious aspect. And then we can invert it right science, if it's done, well can tell us a whole lot about the nature of the world. So science can tell us like okay, well, what are characteristics that give rise to a self like integrate well with the world? What are the characteristics of different ways that we can make sense to make choice as a community more effectively thrive in the world? Its information, its its ideas, its knowledge, its insight, but it's not living it right. You can tell us what is good choices cannot make the choices. So that's the distinction between these things. With that kind of a distinction. Now, your question becomes much more complicated. So what I would say That the blue church was an ideology and a used ideology to play and simulate largely religious function. That in fact, the thing that it largely replaced, right about the turn of the 20th century was more of a religion, a toxin, a set of cultural practices that were largely lived and received and taught by living, that we're not really the subject of information, right? That can be conveyed. You might go to church, and somebody might tell you what to do. But it really matters is that every Sunday you do something or, and by the way, this Sunday may not be go to church, like it may be that every Sunday your family gathers together for brunch, and they get together and socialize. And there's not necessarily a huge amount of consciousness. 
There's not like a dick taught, that tells you this is what you ought to do. It's rather simply what you do. And because it has worked for a long period of time, with the blue Church has done is it over coded that actually had the very bad characteristic. This is kind of that 50s science ism, that we can replace food with food until form that we can replace. Well replace all things that came from nature with things invented and engineered by humans. That's the, one of the worst vices of the blue church did lots of good stuff. But it brought us to the moon but it also had lots of vices. And this is one of them is to try to go back in let's go with childbirth. I think we're all well maybe net we're all I will make this as a strong assertion, I will. I will own this. The set of the medicalization of childbirth that happened during the 20th century, which was largely a consequence of this mindset. And distinctly reinforced with the structures of the blue church was a travesty, and is a fundamentally anti religious function. That the, the traditions of how you go about actually doing a good job of giving birth to a child that is conducive to the holistic characteristics of what it means to be a well born child have been completely overloaded by that structure, top down, imposed it on entirely ideological and enforced by shame, right? How many mothers right now still do not feel empowered to make their own choices and how they want to give birth to their child, but feel shame at not falling in line with what the ideological structures tell them to do. Right? That's a good example of how that shows up. 
So now we're actually a very interesting spot, a sizable fraction of the population is still ideologically possessed. It's still running old code. It's running code that was derivative of an old machine, some of which was adaptive when it was created, some of which was malevolent when it was created, much of which is no longer adaptive. And the psychology that runs that code is not a particularly effective. It's in fact, not the psychology for this new environment. So if you're running the blue church receiver, like your blue church radio, nobody's broadcasting on that signal anymore. If they are, it's noise. Well, the media is keeping someplace. It's noise now, so no truth is broadcast on that signal or very tiny amounts of truth is broadcast on that signal it's it's no longer an adaptive strategy to tune in to be a blue church radio, we need to do is by the way to turn into this new meshwork to become a well a router as opposed a network aware component that has the ability to do things like discern good signal from bad signal, powerful insight from just repetitive information tune into that which is most insightful as opposed to merely that which is repetitive or that which is destructive. And then up regulate that with high fidelity take the part of the signal that is the good part up regulate that it's a part of digital isn't down regulate that and so by virtue of playing that role, ultimately end up being part of what generates really clean and insightful signal.

Chris 1:15:50  
You've talked about Game B in the past. What is going be on, why do we need to shift between one to the other?

Jordan 1:16:01  
So I guess what I'd like to try to do is, is present a frame a way of thinking about it, where we're able to, to recognize that in spite of the significant diversity of approaches that have shown up in the various civilizations that have emerged since the dawn of agriculture, they are all in a deep sense, same kind of game. And I mean that in the sense of the game, meaning that the kind of thing that is played by people, according to rules made up by people and enforced by people, not by the laws of nature, although in the context of the laws of nature, for sure. In this, this seems to be mostly about a couple of basic characteristics. It's a an effort on the part of people to be able to Find a way to work together, so as to dress and deal with the problems of scarcity at the level of nature, not enough food, not enough water. And with the problem of rivalry in the context of other people, both in the tribe and of course, hostile external. Now, that's a pretty compact description of the problem that civilization exists to solve. So if your civilization can't feed you, then it's not viable. If your civilization can't find a way to prevent itself from being torn apart from the inside by people struggling against themselves, or they can't protect itself from the outside, it can't survive. So effectively every single civilization since the dawn of civilization has been some effort to solve those three problems in the past. context of every other civilization. And hence history, that's gaming. That entire block, every single variation on that theme is gay. And the civilization that we just currently live in is the winner of that game. And and by the way, this contains both the critiques and the virtues of our current political debate. Yes, this civilization can be characterized as the center of all forms of tyrian oppression. Yes, this civilization can be characterized as that which is integrated, all virtue and all advanced Israel true. They're not paradoxical. It's just the nature of the way that game is played.
So then the proposition is, for reasons we've talked about, maybe ad nauseum so far today. That game is coming to an end. We cannot continue to play that style of game That we cannot continue to operate in a rivalrous way, we cannot continue to operate in a in a fashion that is dominated by the logic of scarcity. And by the way, we need not, we cannot and we need not that we are now near a point of potential transition. And we need a point of necessary transition, we have within us the capacity to transition into actual abundance. We have within us the capacity to transition into a way of being with each other. That is premised on anti rivalry, not rivalry but anti rivalry. And this transition is a very different kind of game B.
And it's not the kind of game that is mysterious, meaning that we've actually always been playing it a little bit You know we can find locations at any point in time and in any culture in any environment in your person's life. Or this the aspects of this was shown up. The transition is about being able to orient reorient the basis of civilization and put it in the right order to put civilization on a footing of abundance and on a footing of the anti rivals. And on that basis, then to be able to categorically resolve all questions associated with scarcity elegantly, without any real conflict. And so, now on this side, I am also receiving both the optimistic and the pessimistic futurist narratives. The optimistic teleological futurist narrative is that we're on a one way ticket to utopia. No, that's not true. But we have the possibility to get into something that is going to feel a lot like utopia to the people to us now. Like we were to look at it project for 200 years we'd be astounded by what can happen just like you know, the the cushy A's and Louie the 14th Court, but look at our modern environment and just be astounded by the the abundance of what we've been able to achieve. And then you also have the more apocalyptic narrative, that if we do not, if we choose the wrong set of paths, and we refuse to figure out how to give up that which is not supposed to be part of this new world, and do not decide to actually build these things that are necessary and innovative, to invent new things did not yet fully exist, that we don't make the transition, then that which must come to an end, game a will come to an end, and we will not have any place to go. And that, of course, will be presently somewhat unpleasant. So that's the story.

Chris 1:21:41  
And some people would think that's quite naive to say that we can move beyond rivalry. How does the anti rivalrous exist?

Jordan 1:21:53  
There's a whole lot so what you just said. The first part is that I find that almost everybody who accuses something of being naive Actually not engaging in what we were calling, thinking earlier. That's a rhetorical move. That's not in fact, a proposition. But let's move into the second. Remember I mentioned that these have been always present. That is actually just a feature of reality that the rivalrous and the valorous exist. It's just a nowadays, we're in a situation with the anti ravus is becoming more evident and more powerful in our day to day lives. So the rivalrous is most easily characterized by energy. So things that if I have it, like say, a glass of water, or a barrel of oil, then you don't have it. It's one of those things, real physical instantiated material, coalescence of energy in an entropic environment, so that if you use it, then at least some of it is destroyed forever. What's the rivalrous? Yep, we've got that all over the place, particularly Food, water. 
Now on the other side of the continuum, sorry, not a continuum, on the other side is the anti rappers. And in these days, the language that we would use is something like information that well, by me telling you the story about the nature of the avarice, I was nothing except for the energy that I expended to tell it, that's not the story. And you gain it. Whether you like it or not, is a different story, but at least you have it. So we both have it. And this is not not like we've been talking about this nature of the scalability or the copy ability of information ever since computers made it possible to do that. Remember, music but the other characteristic of the anti rivalrous is that becomes more valuable, the more people have it, that the rivalrous is valuable, largely directly in relationship to the degree to which it is rare. The anti virus is viable largely to the degree to which it is shared. And I don't mean that aspirational. And I mean that naive I mean that rigorously, logically. If I have a language and I'm the only one who speaks it is not very fucking useful. If I teach it to you, and I teach it to him, and I teach it to her, and we all speak it, it's actually become very useful. The more people speak it, the more powerful it has become. That is a very anti rivalrous thing. The entire category of phenomena that are characterized by was called the network effect or Metcalfe's law, are associated at the basis with anti rivals phenomena.
Well, let me just connect the dots because I happen to have a direct experience, I've been an entrepreneur, I built technology companies and we're talking about how technology companies work. Collaboration is the birthplace the origin of innovation. Innovation, NT rivalrous. If I have invented calculus, I can give you calculus, and it cost me nothing. And by the way, much, much easier than you inventing it yourself. And he went do something with it, which is very powerful, I would not have been able to do with myself. So it's actually become more viable. It's a more valuable tool more useful, more shared. Well, that's what we mean by the innovation economy. The essence of the innovation economy is the discovery of the degree to which particular approach to working together collaboration is the essence of how we go about innovating. And innovation is anti reverence. And innovation is the source of all wealth. If you actually go back and look at history, some wealth, a very tiny amount of wealth is generated by the sweat of your brow. Well, I mean, again, Jesus said it well. Yes, I can fish and I can get a fish I can give it to you. rivalry. I don't have it, you have it. You eat for a day or I can teach you How to fish, anti Ravelry. I have not lost anything, you've gained something and maybe someday I won't catch a fish and you will you can give one to me. It's more valuable. Honestly, it's very simple. The challenge is actually more about the transition. The challenge is about how do we go about designing a new civilization structure on the basis of an anti rivalrous psychology and not on the basis of a rival isn't on the basis of a scarcity mentality. This is the real trick, because the people with the power still working from your model, and even the people who don't have power but are thinking using the old model, right if you're if your toolkit or is the phrase you cannot you cannot build a new house with the Masters tools or something like that. That's a nice phrase. If your toolkit is a toolkit that is in its basis is very Foundation, a response to scarcity and the scarcity mentality designed to be adaptive to and operate within a rivalrous world. It's not the right tool kit, for solving problems for and in an anti revolution. And so but that's the toolkit we have all the way down to the language that we use. And so we have to figure out how to do that sleight of hand, how to allow the space for this game B to emerge, and it will be emergent. It'll be emergent by design, and we have a way to generate almost like parenting. Parenting is a great example.
I do not design my child. But parents are necessary if you want to have a child. The relationship with parents a child seems to have three specific requirements or rules. The first is obviously the creation of the fertilized egg. which becomes the zygote. The second is the boom, the creation of a space that allows this I go to develop by and for itself on its own basis and on its own terms, not outside in the world. And if I were to put the zeiget of game B in the middle of game A drop it onto the streets of the financial district, it would not survive very long, is not yet strong enough to survive on its own in the world. But if we can create the zygote and then embed it in the womb, then there's the last piece of parenting, which is that we think about ordinary design, like see an architect designing a house or an engineer designing a vehicle, all of the agencies and the part of the designer. When we think about parenting, the agency of the parents is always fully in service of the agency of the child, and the agency of the child is primary. So we can generate the zygote. We can create the womb and then we have to be able to always be mindful To put our agency in the service of this world that is in the process of giving birth to itself. And that's all we can say.

Chris 1:29:12  
In this analogy, what's the womb?

Jordan 1:29:16  
This is going to be spaces that are created and enabled to be available to the people who are experimenting with game B. So literally physically spaces, incubators as it were, or entirely new towns or cities. I actually know that, for example, a number of countries are in the process of endeavoring to figure out how to build quote unquote smart cities of the future. So the idea in the Chinese of course, have built innumerable mega cities over the past several decades. Well, things like that are going to happen, you know, two or more are going to have to get out And it's going to have to be a lot more than two. And then when you need to learn how to gather first and small groups, just in houses and homes, and to create this territory in the space where they can gather, and practice, game B and create, I think you said the field or create a space where these practices are honored and they're explored. And then those groups are engineered to come into relationship in larger spaces. And perhaps this is where we just start thinking about things like resources in one of the primary aspects of game is the necessity to continue to work in things that are not your highest purpose. So the degree to which that we can build through innovation, to better innovation. The ability to bring more and more people into a space where they can simply fully and enter into their most fully realized selves and thereby become available to source and support Superior innovation, we start getting inadequate autocatalytic system. And again, we present this in a way that is not naive. Let's take the lineage of technology companies. In fact, I'll own it since you've got a British accent technology companies in the United States of America. Let's go from Ford to Google. We take steps General Motors, IBM, Hewlett Packard, Amazon, Apple, Microsoft, Google, something like that. One of the things we noticed as we go to that lineage is they have shifted from a more scarcity rivalry based culture, to a more abundance anti Ravelry based culture. Henry Ford would have been rather surprised by the prospect that he should have fed all of his employees highly nutritious meals with personal chefs, and provision them with places to play and to drive around on scooters. for Google, it's obvious, because that's how you create a space that is maximally conducive to creative collaboration. Which is maximum conducive to innovation, which is maximum conducive to making a ton of money. We just need to push that further, what's the further envelope you can get. And I'm interesting this actually happening. groups that I've been collaborating with are beginning the process of trying to construct entrepreneurial activities that show up is having a game a side that can be very effective and competitive in game A, but are actually anchored in the game beside, and are oriented towards generating and producing, taking the resources to come and providing them out into activities and envelopes that create these zones of these rooms for continuing development and exploration of a more generative community.
If the story that's told is true, then it will be in our bones. Be in our deepest mythology and our deepest traditions, our deepest religions. That this is the place to go. That when trouble is brewing, gather together, and enter into the space. This is where we do these sorts of things. This is how we solve these kinds of problems.