John 0:00  
We might want to set up what we want to do. Well, let me indicate what I'd like to do. And then maybe we could all say what we'd like to do. And then we could come to some consensus agenda quickly. I'm interested in exploring, and this is completely self serving and a lot of ways this project that I'm on right now, which is the project of trying to understand what's happening in terms of a lot of our shared work, in terms of, you know, comparing it I think fruitfully to the ancient medical technology of dialectic and trying to put that into a dialogue with what's going on, and see if it's possible to integrate the kind of thing you do guy and circling the kind of things you do. Jordan in your talks where you're pursuing coherence with people, if we can integrate that with you know, five Lia Sophia for lack of a better term, so that we have something analogous to the meta sacred technology of ancient dialectic. I've been trying to work out both the cognitive science And the phenomenological dimensions and try and get into coordinate I've been reading, starting a lot of new research. Sperber stuff on the dialectical nature of the dialogical nature of reasoning, post stuff on procedural metacognition, because I think it's deeply relevant, for example, to what's going on and circling. And so I would, I would like to and you know, I've been exploring that with, with both you, Jordan and you guys, individually, and then you guys have also been doing something I think, at least structurally analogous. And then, you know, and Chris is, of course, one of my constant partners in crime, and all of these endeavors trying to see how people are responding to the meaning crisis. So that's what I would like to do. Maybe everybody could take a moment and you know, check in and say what they would like out of this and but also might be valuable to our, you know, our respective audiences etc because we're deciding to record this, and then maybe we can coordinate a consensual agenda. So I'll pass it to Chris next.

Chris 2:08  
Okay. Um, so what I think it might be interesting, there's this particular strand, I want to call it a method, but not quite. But this sort of these kinds of conversations that are happening in the virtual space are inflicted with a particular kind of Tila orientation has setting them apart from the normal discourses that we're used to seeing because we're used to seeing discourses, in one of a number of categories, right? We're used to seeing discourse as casual and social, or we're used to seeing it formalized, and in the sense of more academic or scholarly or intellectual conversations. We're accustomed to seeing things framed in debate, and obviously debates are infected with competition. And so that creates a particular accent and a particular way of relating to the exercise. And that's clearly not what's going on here. Right? What's going on here aren't a series of debates, and even though they're social and genial, and there's a certain warmth to these conversations, which is an asset to them, they're not quite that either. So there's some combination of a more scholarly or a more intellectual interface, but accented with a sort of warm conviviality, and the fact that then they're recorded and they're publicized adds yet another dimension. So you and I were talking recently about this, John, about how the combination of these different strands of conversation these different methods of dialogue, into dlo goes, maybe creates a fertile ground for, for civilization for something altogether new. And something that might actually be a host of something that then can be can be lifted. All kinds of ways. So maybe to annotate what's what exactly? How is this kind of dialogue is different from what we're accustomed to? And then what potential does that have for?

John 4:10  
I like that idea about symbol on that. What's happening right now is we're trying to join together things that have previously not been joined together. And that opens up a field for new symbolization. I think that's an important point. I just wanted to note that, who should go next first up.

Chris 4:30  
Jordan, please. 

Jordan 4:33
I'm wondering if we're if we're all actually oriented the same way spatially in our visual field. For me, this was a counter clockwise rotation. Does anybody else have that idea for me? 

John 4:40
It's left to right. And it's linear. I'm on most left than Chris is right. And they needed to get to the right of Christ guys to the right of you. 

Jordan 4:55
So, interesting. So Chris, to the equation which is we're also dealing with the reality of the complexification of dialogue, where each of our perspectives on the relationships that are happening, or at least a little bit mysterious. So for me this feels a lot like a continuing inquiry into the real embodiment in the forum of a distributed cognition, of the mystery of a meta psychotechnology. Something along those lines, feels like that's what is pulling me here and just kind of keeps ringing in my consciousness as we continue in this path. So that's what I would say. And to me, that sounds a lot like a variation of what I've just heard before. Some maybe some different things coming in a different direction.

Guy 5:55  
Great. The real reason why I'm here is I continually have experiences with the three. Well, I guess four phases that I'm looking at where it seems like we have a conversation which the linguistic loop called guy cannot survive. And I like that. And I want that to happen. And I want to notice as it happens, and when it doesn't happen, what are the patterns we see, connect all the things that you're talking about? Because I think that there's something one of the things that brings us all together that you all kind of mentioned is there's something there's some kind of dialogue like biologos. That goes on. That seems to me one of the few places in our times where people are relatively still as, as Chris highlighted, available to be parched. Right in ways that go beyond all of their representations, and reorganized. And so I think there's something about how we dialogue about anything but let the dialogue, and how it works, and how to articulate it in a way that it's procedures so we can we can, we can bring it in and distribute it and make it more available and have that more, more of those interactions be really available in all the, all the different dimensions. So I want to like talk about that. And I also want to find ourselves doing it. I'm not doing it, and then noticing that, and then asking what was just happening?

John 7:50  
That's very good. Jordan and I talk about, you know, constant moving between head and hora. You know, the conceptual theoretical space but also re engaging deep in the heart right to that, that that embodied centeredness. And so yeah, I think we should keep that going. Maybe I could maybe I could start if I'll just propose something as an initial thing. And maybe that would would gel because it sounds like we're pretty convergent and what we want to do, I want to pick up on what Jordan said, because the work I'm doing was sparked by his invocation and the insight that he provoked to me when we invoke the notion of a meta sacred technology, a second technology that in some sense orchestrates and Shepards vets and generates and dispenses with obsolete psycho technologies in some fashion that coordinates to give us access to the power of distributed cognition and the collective intelligence there in something that will guide us normatively. And practically in, again, the generation the dispensing the organization, orchestration of psychotechnologies for addressing what I've called the meaning crisis. And so I want to I want to pick up on that as an idea. And one of the things that I'm interested in is, because that was just what I see ancient dialectic doing is dialectic as both that kind of meta sacred technology operating within distributed cognition, but it also reflects back into individual cognition, and it becomes right a process of aspiration towards the medical ristic of wisdom. So, the ontological movements, right within the individual, a coordinated access to distribute cognition and so. Those are me, I'm trying to sort of lay out what I know I'm not claiming this exhausted, but there's an emergent phenomenology. 
And it's helpful because it's a phenomenology that can be put into some cognitive processing terms for me. So there's a horizontal dimension, which is the interpersonal, which leads to the meta psycho technology in distributed cognition. And then dialectic also has the meta heuristic of wisdom. And those two are feeding each other. And then there's, there seems to be another dimension one we've already alluded to, in which we're constantly shifting between theory and furia. we're shifting between theorizing and then taking it back in and seeing if it becomes something that is contemplated Lee available to us and viable to us. Right. And then there's one that Jordan and guy have marked very clearly and repeatedly. And I think and this is a provocative, I mean, in a sense of thought provoking thing. There's this other dimension, which is every current conversation is a meshed in right is feels the constraining presence, I mean constraining and both positive and negative sense, you know, both limiting at affording the constraining a presence of other conversations that are right so that what I think Jordan, you called that at one point, a meta conversation, the meta conversation, that seems to be another dimension and then there's some overall dynamic dimension of how they constantly. Well, that's too strong. They have the potential to come into, I'll use your term here now, Jordan, a kind of coherence whereby they are mutually affording each other in a sort of non linear fashion that has some intelligible novelty as a constant feature of it. It's constantly having an emergent disclosing aspect to it. So those are the dimensions I'm seeing at work and what we're doing. And I'm just putting them out there and asking now for some responses, so we can get some riffing going, get some jazz. 

Jordan 12:22  
John lays down a mean bass trap. I felt very much dropped into the groove. So, Guy, from my perspective, I felt somewhere between 75 and 80-90% of the time that there was a feeling of flowness there that I could actually kind of like, feel myself dropping into the space that was expressing itself through John's voice. And actually, I popped into a place of actually noticing it very physically, when he corrected himself on the term constantly, with regard to the meta conversation, because when he corrected himself, I brought my attention to the fact that he himself felt that something was off in the flow. And then I was like, Oh, yes, that's right. And so even deeper, it was actually brought deeper into a few resonance and syncretic because I could actually sense where the where the flow was and where the languaging had been off. 

Chris 13:12
So as you were talking, John, I was thinking also, have you talked about figuratively the relation between the head and the heart, that seemed to be merging in these conversations? And how there's something about the training of the relational training that happens inter subjectively. What you might say horizontally, right, there's almost like there's a pedagogical function to the inter subjective relation that then manages to espouse verticality, right. I think of the metaphor like two people working face to face with one another and they're cooperative in a particular activity. And then as they cooperate in a particular activity, the ground beneath them deepens as a consequence, almost Incidentally, so that there is, to use the term that you adapted from our clue, reciprocal widening. Yeah, that happens between persons ends up becoming accepted into an ontological reciprocal way. Right? And they happen, they happen. They happen. They happen simultaneously. And so if that's true, or if something analogous to that is true, it makes sense of the fact that these social interactions seem to bear witness to something of a higher order, a presence to the interaction seems to possess the interaction because it's accessing something perhaps ontologically that's not something emergent ontologically, that's not reducible to any one of the participants, nor even the conversation itself that there's a meta practice, and we're there.

John 14:50  
That's really good. I like those two threads. So there's one very important point about the stats like the da'at, ancient word for sort of faith, but it means being coupled to a system such that your transformation discloses to you how that the course of events is going, undergoing transformation and you can follow the flow, and then you can sense when you're off course and trespassing, and then you need to come back on target and stuff like that, and sort of a biblical notion I was using that because you know it because what Jordan's pointing to is there's very much that sense, and yet, it has a normative guidance to it. And then for me that leaps, I think I get a sense I don't know how to articulate it, but I think you get a sense that it links to what Chris was talking about, because this this this seducing the seduction right. He of this emergent thing seems to be a place that what to use your words called guy it calls to us it that it has that kind of normativity the abduction, it's like as things are getting produced from us. We feel something has emerged, that it's also drawing forth from us in education is precisely the sense of something beyond us, drawing us along, and trying to tie the education that you're talking about, Chris, to the sense that Jordan was, was mentioning.

Chris 16:35
I think it just happened and I think this is drawn from perhaps from Jordan and yours conversation I saw recently, about the idea that whatever is drawing us forth is also speaking us, that we are being spoken by in one of one of you said that wasn't me. But this idea of vocality which harkens to the logos, right the meaning of vocality as being gathered by it being spoken Kumbaya, I think is is wonderfully resonant.

John 17:02  
Both of those being gathered to belong together, but also be being spoken, like intelligibility emerging from us. And in us, it's almost like as we are transformed, we are informed and that that becomes the basis for the information that feeds into our intelligibility. But Jordan is, I think he wants to say something.

Jordan 17:23  
Well, the only thing that I would like to say right now is just to notice the feeling of sacredness that began to build in the past few moments. And to be very careful with the presence that is this disclosing itself among us, given that, well, that is the right way to relate to that.

John 17:41  
Hmm. I think that's right. I like the invocation of that term. Also, because that's something that you know, Christopher, Jordan and I, we've been talking a lot about the religion that's not a religion and the chance that all of this meta conversation might be linked to, I don't know what word to use here, but something like a new appreciation. I'm trying to pick up on many senses of the word appreciation, a new appreciation of sacredness.

Guy 18:13  
And it seems like I'm really glad that you said that, Jordan, because I was about to say that thing and I think that sacredness that we can find ourselves inside. There's something for me about the sense in which and this is speaking to this, this implicit thing going that almost requires us not to be aware of it and then find ourselves in it having it already had begun. It's like all the many times, I was like doing mushrooms with my friends all night long. And then at some point somebody looks over this and hey, look, the dawn. But there was this experience of insight that we had that it was already done before we recognize it. So part of the recognition was that we hadn't noticed that it was already done. That sense of something as we're dialoguing this necessary concealment of that horizon is picking up and then there's that moment of already, of all readiness, that reveals the ground that we are standing on this ground and the horizon at this kind of moment of reveal, that is something that seems characteristic or can be disclosed that we call something like sacred.

Chris 20:00  
Sorry, I love to use the word dawning, Guy, I think because it both, it evokes this sort of the illuminating metaphor, but also the coming into being that something is comes into being by realization, and that our realization of the presence is also it's coming into being that the two are coupled and dawning is such a beautiful term because it speaks both of those together. I love your use of that. 

John 20:36  
The dawning also indicates that something that there's a rise in from which the dining thing has come. So there's also a sense of the dawning points to that from which, the darkness from which it will always come, because it's cut that comes from over the horizon. And I like that aspect of the idea of dawning too. So I mean, this is a theme. I noticed at the beginning I was going to this is going to be one of the things I did. This is a theme in the ancient practice of dialectic. I mean, and the metaphor that Plato used that, and it's a difficult metaphor, given our current sort of cultural political climate. But the metaphor is so apt because of all the things he evokes, he says we always have to be seduced into philosophy, right? And this picks up on it miss Keller's notions of aspiration. Right? If we made it, I mean, this sounds simplistic, but if we make it, it's not sacred. I mean, we have to feel ourselves drawn into it. And it has to have something analogous to agency though, like what you're talking about, Guy, its own internal grammar, duty. Let me that metaphor that is running before us. And that makes it possible for us that we have to have a reverence and respect to. I agree with that. And like I say, that resonates with the reason why I like this seduction metaphor for all of its troubling associations aside, is it brings in because I think about this love is that way to write love draws you, but if you make it, it's not love, right? And if somebody just if you're just receiving it, it's not love. There's some. This is what I'm struggling with, and you guys have all seen that I'm struggling to really try and develop this platonic notion of participation. Right? It's neither if we make it, it's not sacred. And if we try to make love, it's not love. Sorry, you know what I mean, we can make love in another sense. But if it's something we try to construct in an authorial fashion, it's not love. And if we are if we're just receiving passively, that's not easy, either. And the reason why this matters is because I know Jordan talks a lot about love. Also, this brings up one of the platonic virtues which is sophrosyne, right? So this is this is we have no good word for translating it. It's often translated as temperament, temperance, or our moderate modesty or moderation. None of the words are good, right? It means a kind of self control, but it's the kind of self control that we find ourselves in. Rather, it's not like in karate, and karate is, you know, I want to do that thing, but I'm not going to do it, and I hold myself back, I make myself not do it. But sophrosyne is, I could do that. I don't want to, but I naturally tempted to do the good. I find myself loving the good rather than having to resist the evil. And so I the reason why I'm on about this right now is because that seems to me to be a point where sort of platonism and Christianity touched and the notion of the church as a gathering, and platonic dialectic as a gathering, the logos and Christianity the logos. You see, I'm flinging things out here because I can sense them, you know, drawing towards each other. And that's why that's why I'm here. I want to bring this into discussion. I want to see, you know, what we can do with these potential connections. As let's dialogos.

Jordan 24:24
John, would you say the Greek word again, and if you wouldn't mind spelling it in the Greek letters? 

John 24:31  
I don't know if I can spell it in the Greek letters. I haven't done my ancient Greek in a bit. It's sophrosyne. Yeah, it's one of the four cardinal virtues. Wisdom, courage and justice. And it's one that we don't talk very much about in our society. But because of its connections to love and logos, and ecclesia, and dialectic, it seems to me like it might be the virtue that senses the normativity that we're talking about here. That's what I'm proposing.

Jordan 25:21  
That sounds very much like it's a nice way of describing how I felt before I spoke a moment ago, there was there was an awareness of a path two paths, one path had a path that was moving too fast, sort of muddying the waters or grasping. And the other path is the path that had more respect and therefore is more available to reveal. And that the sensing of rightness, like listening to where rightness was calling, and which direction had that feeling of being called up and into, oriented towards the path of, we need to be very careful to protect the sacredness of the moment.

John 26:05  
Right, and so Plato dedicates a dialogue to it. In fact, the comedies where it's all about sophrosyne. 	And it's interesting because it's a dialogue that's also considered to be aware. He talks a lot about his notion of rationality. And also one of the clearest exemplification of Socratic links, all those three words circling very tightly together, in that particular dialogue.

Guy 26:30
Jordan, when you made that distinction, in that felt sense of there's something sacred, and there's a pace, and you could feel the two and be aware of that you were feeling the two, for lack of a better way of putting this, what was the sense organ you were using feel the difference?

Jordan 26:53  
It felt like from the top of my throat to about six inches below my belly button, and my front. So you'd say my upper torso. And I noticed, as you say that there's like a couple of other examples as a feeling like the one that just came to me, was actually as a child, actually being learning how to be in relationship with an animal like a cat. Where there's a sensing of the real sensing of the sensitivity of the moment how to actually put yourself in a place where you're creating an invitation, and very much has to actually be a real invitation. It can't be a fake invitation. I'm saying there's a difference. Yeah. And really just listening to what is calling for itself in the other, something like that. Just beautiful.

Chris 27:54  
So what you just said reminds me of this distinction of vulnerability versus exposure in one of these dialogues, and how I remember hearing that and thinking it was such a well articulated distinction. Because to me, it actually tracks the modal difference between the having and being, because exposure is that something has been laid, that something has been involuntarily stripped from you, that you've been somehow dispossessed and are at a loss and are in danger. And vulnerability, obviously, is this volitional and that's the difference. So there's something about the sort of volitional nature of being vulnerable, that allows the tuning to rhythm. I think that you're describing, Jordan, and it has to do with that listening to harkening you need, there's a necessary kind of department of vulnerability required to be able to synchronize and tune with someone else, and then to synchronize them to and more broadly in a more cosmic way if I can use that term. And one way of perhaps understanding the function of this dialogos is as a training in vulnerability, not just social vulnerability, but also a kind of existential and phenomenological vulnerability that then seeds to the reference that you're describing.

Guy 29:44  
There's a lot of hums I noticed happening. Yeah, that was good. In this something I just wanted little pieces. Speaking to me is there's something about listening, or hearing, that I'm hearing that sense of. Because I've noticed by looking at my own life, okay, so there's that quality that you're talking about where what are those things that if I tuned what which which transcendence? What beyond the horizon? If I tune into it will afford all these capacities coming forward right in my character and draw and another else and then create these things, right? What is what is it? I guess it's like, well, what sense organ, maybe literally and metaphorically, do I use to detect that particular transcendence, right? And then notice what's off and on in that kind of way. And I think I think hearing is what's really speaking to me because seeing has this quality, it ends up its own kind of temporal dimension to it, where you see surface of things, right? Therefore, you end up in when you're in a lot of seeing metaphor, you end up explaining a lot, right? Because you're only seeing the surfaces so it draws a certain kind of temporality to it. And you can also kind of get the sense of like Newtonian view, very good. 
That you can you can get you can see the world is like things that still and then they move and other things move and you get this kind of, you can, you can draw out Newton and all of its wonders. But then there's listening, where listening has this quality as far as I can tell, it's like, if I look at the table right? I have to kind of explain what's going on internally, but if I hear the table, there's a way that it discloses it's inferiority. Right. There's something about sound, and then we look at, there's if we couldn't speak to each other and we were just standing here, looking at each other, like it'd be a completely different experience. But through the medium of sound and hearing that seems to reveal interiority and use the organ of interiority for it to be revealed. The other thing about hearing that's different than seeing, the acoustical space is infinitely unfillable. Visual space, I can kind of fill it up, right? There's a finite but like acoustical space, I think you can. You can get it as like deeply silent, or you can like you can get it infinitely loud. There's something about it that has an infinity about it like a horizon in which it can resonate so many different things at once. So I'm just clumsily trying.

John 33:32  
Well, that's the one thing I wanted to pick up on, though, the last thing you said. See, sound has the capacity for resonance that vision doesn't have. And it's interesting because the Hebrew God is invisible, the overwhelming sense that is invoked for coming into relationship to him is hearing. Harken, harken and taste, because those are ones that describe resonance. Because you know, the relationship is a covenant relationship, which is not a contract, we misunderstand a covenant is a contract because a covenant is supposed to be a relationship of resonance, reciprocal opening, not just agreement. And so I think hearing is covenantal in a way, right in which sight isn't. I think you're right, sight moves us towards more of an appropriation or relationship, whereas hearing, because of its capacity for resonance and covenance, puts us into that kind of reciprocal relationship.

Chris 34:45  
And one thing that resonance actually does too, John, is it seems to be evocative of the other senses. The sound can invoke a smell, a sound evokes tactility in the way that sight doesn't and that's all folded into that resonance in that capacity to be, the capacity to fan out also. 

John 35:15
We can embody aspects of sound, we literally (participatory) we are in our body and our thumos, and pacing and lots of things. 

Guy 35:30
It's like you're on the horizon. Right? I can jump something and not know what I'm not in. There's a link between if I hear something I don't know what it is. My wife is like crazy. She hears a sound and has to know everything. Just kind of link between hearing and knowing, and that there's an availability that hearing is has the capacity to be here, what it doesn't know. 

John 36:00
So there's a kind of vulnerability in the center of hearing. 

Jordan 36:05
The implication of hearing has the notion of the relationship between the silence and the sound. And notice the metaphorical connection to the rising of the sun. Right? We know that the sound is followed by silence is followed by sound. And that's how we understand that when the sun goes away, we have a feeling that it comes back and there's rhythms in nature. They're happening all the time. And then we are always going to be open to the possibility of what comes next because we have a feeling that next this is the thing.

John 36:29  
That's good. Recently, this book Bearing Witness to Epiphany talks about the musicality of intelligibility the way you just talked about, Jordan. There's these rhythms that we pick up on, and they're constantly playing between determination and what's indeterminant like you said, God, and there's something interesting there, Jordan. Because that that, that brings me back to da'at because you're talking about a kind of trust, which isn't the same thing as like, you know, seeing that it is the case, but it is a sense of resonance, I've been trained to trust because that notion is circling around. One of the differences for me between vulnerability and exposure, when I sense reciprocal covenant show vulnerability with somebody that engender trust in me. Which is not the same thing as me knowing now I've got Jordan, I know what he's gonna do. That's not what trust is. Trust is not I see what he's going to do. Trust is I have this embodied sense where a couple together and he's vulnerable, like me, we are co humanized together and that's why I'm trusting him. 

Chris 37:48  
That covenantial co-respiration, is much of what we mean by faith.

Guy 37:54  
Would you say that again?

Chris 37:56  
The covenantial co-respiration that John is just describing and Jordan's sort of invocation of the rhythm of that co respiration. It's reliable rhythmic nature and our connection to that reliable rhythmic nature, the way it allows us to mutual model, John, is much of what we mean by faith. 

John 38:20  
Yeah, it's the sense that the mutual modeling has taken its present. And the thing I want to say about the reliability, I think that's the right term, but I am cautious and I want to do what Jordan said always respect the sacredness here. The reliability is not that you can see all the implications. It's a reliability that sounds like a Zen koan, its reliability that expects novelty, right? 

Jordan 38:45
It expects alive.

Guy 38:50  
I'm wondering about reliability that expects novelty, but it also sounds like what created its reliability was initiative and its relationship to novelty.

John 39:03  
Yeah, it's the sense that there's the coupling gives an adaptivity to novelty, that you have a sense of now embodying. When I'm talking to you guys, or even when I'm talking to somebody who I might have more significant theoretical differences with, I use the example of Paul Vanderclay and we should invoke Paul in this conversation anyways. Because he's present in a sense, he and I disagree about quite a bit. Or Jordan, your conversation with Jonathan Pageau also speaks to this. Because I've talked to both of you at some point for more philosophical topics, you have some significant philosophical disagreements about some things, but nevertheless, there was genuine resonance in there. And I sensed that you were being equally vulnerable and there was a growing sense of trust between you, because I could sense the flow of the conversation taking shape. And that's exactly it. And it's precisely because it takes shape beyond me that I have a trust in it. That sounds so simplistic, but that's part of what's going on. 

Jordan 40:15
There's this feeling that I've had my wife and I began playing instruments together with our one one year old. And neither of us have a particular history of musicality, we're actually just exploring that all together. And one thing I've definitely noticed is that there's a period of time, let's say, we both have drums, where something's not there. There's a lack of something. And then there's a moment and as Guy will remind us, that is the moment that we always noticed after it has already been there. Where there's a sensing of there being a dropping into a groove, a sensing that something is now holding us that is real. And it creates a context of this notion of da'at, of faith, of trust. And as you say, John, precisely the lightness of his is that many, many things can happen that are talking totally unexpected and anticipated, but they're all right, because they're held in the groove. And there's something about not just all right, but actually they're delightful. They open things up. And so there's a rhythm and all of a sudden the pause. And if somehow we all kind of knew how to hold the pause and the silence, and then the note drops back in. It's a feeling of boom, we're back there with the groove was actually holding the whole space. And that seems to happen, right? This seems to happen in the conversation with us a time when we're trying to figure out how to actually bring this thing into the groove, the groove lands and we can feel the invitation of the possibility and each thing is now invited into a higher degree of novelty and higher degree of creativity, because it's held in a container with that possibility is joyful.

John 41:55  
Appreciating the joy. A book of understanding and gratitude and thank God I'm alive and I'm glad to be here, you guys are great. That's all what's happening.

Chris 42:09  
Yeah, yeah, appreciation comes to my mind too, in both senses appreciation, the gratitude part and the deepening sense of appreciation.

John 42:27  
I just want to note that that's you invoke that but I gotta put those clearly together. Thank you, Chris. There's a deep connection between diologos and anagoge, there's something because the moving up the ontological levels is also making use of the horizontal thing but it's transposed onto the world. 

Guy 42:55
Okay, I want to talk about that a little bit. I want to settle with that one for a moment like I'm still right at your forehead. Would you say that again? 

John 43:20
So I was talking about these two dimensions of the logos, right? The horizontally interpersonal and the ontological, but then the anagoge gave the reciprocal opening, which is what moves you up to the ontological levels. Although the relationship is with the world, right, it invokes the covenantial resonance with the world because the psyche getting organized allows me to see more deeply into the world, and then the world can speak more deeply to me, I can hearken better to it that transforms me. Then you get something analogous to what happens in conversation happening in anagoge. And so there is a bridge between the interpersonal community conversation and the ontological, right? The ontological movement in the notion of anagoge. So there's a deep connection between dialogos and anagoge.

Chris 44:27  
And then dialectic.

John 44:29  
Well, yes, very much, of course.

Guy 44:31  
Yeah. Dialectic, how you mean? What's the distinction? How's that different?

John 44:42  
So I take, and I'm playing around with these terms. And I'm playing with all of you in the sense of, you know, appreciative, serious play, about how are these terms going to fall out for us. But for that dialectic for Plato with something above and beyond just dialogue, because I liked it met the coordination of all these dimensions that I talked about together. So you get a sense of which part of the time when you were practicing dialectic, you would be by yourself in a non linguistic furia, practicing something like a contemplated and anagoge. And but that was also somehow, like I said, it's interwoven with what we're doing now, you know, a back and forth conversation. And so dialectic was, typically the more the term that the term the term Plato used for what I would call the psycho technology that was coordinating all of these together. That's why Hegel took up the term dialectic. I think he changed it fundamentally from the platonic context. But that's why he took up the notion of dialectic rather than dialogue 

Guy 45:55
To me that word seems like listening. So listening to everybody speak in all the different terms that are co hearing, and coming in, and coming apart and and then being at the center of John's head, which I would recommend. When I'm participating in that way, where I feel like I've become a better coordinator. I'm coordinating things, this is the vulnerability part, even right now I'm just right at the edge of the thought and I could fall over. But there's something I'm listening to, I'm tuning into, I'm looking at all of your faces, you're kind of back and forth. That yeah, what how does coordination come into play with this because whatever it is, it feels like that's what I'm doing, in what it takes to listen and engage and participate on this.

John 46:58  
I think there's a phenomenological - and I'll stop briefly, because I'd like to hear what Jordan says. Guy, both you and Jordan have been masters of what you've just put your fingers on. I mean this with a lot of respect, the two of you. One of the things that I deeply value and appreciate is exactly that. I'm not trying to say that's the only thing, but one of the things that often stands out to me and I'll stand back and I'll go, Wow, that would like something like what you just articulated. That coordination phenomenologically, I want to propose one aspect of it, that the coordination seems to me that there's a sense of which the trusting is becoming embodied, we're trusting that part of us that's participating in the da'at, and so that there's a trust, like when I'm sparring or doing Tai Chi, there's that sense of coordination I have to trust, in that participation in the da'at, speaking as a cognitive scientist, which is a different thing. And so I want to be careful here, keeping the balance between theory and theoria. But what we're talking aboutis a kind of exaptation. We're taking the cerebellum, which function for literal sensory motor coordination. And we now have the increasing evidence of that it gets exapted to coordinate any conflict set of contingencies that it's encountering, not just sensory motor contingencies. So what we're doing and this is why you have practices like Tai Chi. The idea is, you put your system through sensory motor challenge, but you do it in such a ritualized context that it affords exapting the cerebellum to trace, you know, complex contingencies in your environment, in your cognition, in your communication. I think those two go together because when I can trust in the participation, I sink into my embodiment and that helps to figure the exaptation of the cerebellum function. That's how I would answer that but like I said, I want to hear what Jordan and Guy, you have to say because you guys have an artistry about this. And I want you to speak it, but I wish I had magic here. Like, I want to know if what I said sings to your phenomenology. But obviously there's a skillfulness that I want to understand better as well.
So now I made silence.

Jordan 49:43  
Well, it's a tricky business. Yeah, that was non trivial. There's a whole bunch of different things that were being going on there and the the feeling of trying to bring the T's and tune the threads of indra's net in something can actually play music and harmonies not trivial. I think that's what is the inquiry is that feeling that feeling of being actually sense within yourself. The was the word that you use for sits within yourself the cerebellum doing its busy work trying to actually bring all of these diverse capacities for perceiving and expressing into their sensitivity and listening to what is being, you know what's coming and noticing like, where's that landing in me? And how do I actually shift that landing? And how do I bring these complex pieces of me into alignment with each other, so the resonance is getting louder and louder. I'm listening, listening, and then the signal pops very clear. And then the instrument of me that can then bring it back out with some clarity and fidelity is the thing that I was hearing. And then I was actually endeavoring to then do is that I could try to do it in the process of actually even expressing it. Which was not easy.

John 50:50  
Well, you just did it. But there's a thing you do, Jordan, if you allow me to speak metaphorically, you'll pause, and then you'll do something I find analogous to like a mindfulness or meditation, but you pause and sense, and here I'm going to use my metaphors, you taste in your mind. And you're tasting your mind and you're seeing what it is portending. You're trying to sense the the portents of your mind, the omens. Like what is happening in those moments for you?

Jordan 51:44  
Not easy to explain. Lots and lots of things, many things. And what I noticed is that as I get older, I have more ability to be in relationship with the things that are happening. I'll give an example. I can't remember exactly when this happened. There was some period of time ago, about 12 minutes ago. And I think it was something. Well, actually, I'll do much earlier in the conversation, so Chris mentioned this experience of the deepening of the ground beneath you. And remember, he's in the process of expressing something that is very complex, and that's the language he used. Those are the words that fell out of his mouth into our ears. And when he said that, I actually felt the ground beneath me drop, like not a little bit, a lot actually. Felt that sense of dizziness, like my stomach actually felt vertigo. And I felt the vertigo landed so hard on my body of whoa, my God, there's something about that poetry that was extremely powerful. And then later on, something that Guy said, I actually felt this, I thought it was really interesting. I felt this sensation that I learned about, in the context of samskaras, which actually felt physically something in my chest coming up my throat and actually wanted to be breathed out of my mouth. Literally a piece of me was liberated and healed in the experience of that.
And so, as I had that physical sensation in periods of my life, and it was named samskara. And I also was able to have that experience happen enough times to be in relationship with the first person. Ie. I have not downloading a notion of what it is, but just living it, noticing, and then the meaningfulness of it when next when experience when a guy says something, I'm like, oh, okay, I've had this before. That's interesting, becomes a thing that's part of this story and the part of the experience that I'm having and then this part of me begins to notice that but I've noticed that in the context of all the other things that are happening, and it ever happened in my entire experience, and all the conversations I've ever had, and there's something that happens where there's like a point where there's a way to allow that to settle. And listen as you say, Guy, like listening with this broader  extended eardrum, this broad tempo that's Dr. diaphanous and multi dimensional listening out, and then something it's so hard to explain. Ah, it's like I almost want to do a Fourier transform on some sort of super high dimensional signal. It's happening both temporarily like the silences and rhythms, and also happening in real time with multiple different embedded overtones. And there's something about a wholeness to though. That's the thing. It's quite diverse is lots of different things, but there's a wholeness to it. It's a lot of different things that have a wholeness, and that wholeness pops. And then I have some experience, like the sensing of a wholeness that is multimodal, and not obviously connected, but you can listen. And notice, like the eyes and the ears and the sound and the taste, and all the experiences, that's the thing, and they're all connected.

John 55:30
I'm glad we recorded that. That was great. Thank you, Jordan. That was fantastic.

Guy 55:35  
Here's a way where I really appreciated you walking inside of that. And as you were describing, you were simultaneously doing the thing that you were describing, in writing and thinking about that fractal autopoetic thing. А question I can hear, it seems that what calls the particular holes into view to describe is relevant, and not the corner in the wall. There's something where you're always a little bit behind that thing. That is, as you're describing it, you're also trying to describe why that's relevant as you're finding it out. There's that quality of it. But I'm just wondering about this, and I think really is pertinent to the whole conversation. Which is, what is beckoning you to even start doing that? Like, I'm imagining it's something transcendent, I'm getting the sense of the Heideggerian sense of ecstatic time or how the future calls. It's almost like the future is calling forth something that current representations can't hold or make go away. Therefore I'm tempted in such a way that I start to do that.

John 57:00
Makes me think of Keller's notion that in aspiration although I'm causing my future self, my future self is normatively calling me. Although I am going to do the things that will cause that future self, so there's no teleology, that future self nevertheless has a normative authority over me, and it's calling me. So what I'm wondering is, if you'll allow me to stretch this into an analogy, does the world have a future self that we have to cause to be, but nevertheless is normatively calling us forward? We're aspiring towards that world. And it's inspiring us. When I take inspiration to be an insight that affords an aspiration.

Guy 58:20
I call that self Brianne. My wife.

Jordan 58:41  
Yeah, I've had this experience. I've mentioned this to Vanessa several times. I sometimes refer to her as my unconscious. I am not actually even able to be aware of myself or what's happening, unless she is in relationship with me. Like if our relationship is off, I don't even know what's going on. Yeah, I've realized much of that and so what you just named there, Guy, I think is actually for real. Like Yes. Yes. The sense organ that invites us into the future, she has a name.

John 59:12  
Yeah. That's again that I find the same thing with Sara. And that brings back to a platonic notion of Daya tema ultimately was the one that led Socrates, and again, there's the seduction metaphor, evoking the Eros at work and all of this in some powerful ways. Yeah, I agree with Jordan, Guy. I think that was a very fortuitous thing, meaning your wife, and you, Jordan, also doing that I find the same thing with Sara. And speaking as a cognitive scientist, the mutually accelerating disclosure is how you fall in love with somebody. So I get more and more vulnerable as you reciprocate. That's how you fall in love, above and beyond just wanting to have sex with them. I don't know, this is weird juxtaposition. Does that mean there's a vulnerability to the world as well?

Guy 1:00:38  
Okay, I just want to say, the perceptual shift I just got on that made me turn around. So does that mean there's a vulnerability to the world.

John 1:01:23
I mean, there are mythological frameworks, if you'll allow me to use these mythologically and not in any biological sense, in which the sacred is not only masculine, but also feminine, not only yang but also yin.

Chris 1:01
Which brings in fertility, that womb-like quality.

Jordan 1:01:49  
Both yes, but the womb-like quality and the fertility, the source of creation.

John 1:01:56  
And the Hebrew word for compassion literally means to be like a womb.

Unknown Speaker  1:02:03  
Right, in some ways this is a better way of understanding, perhaps even more reflexively than the sort of partner-to-partner relationship the three of you are describing. But it's a better way to conceive of oneself as that having that womb-like property because then your commitments, your inward covenants aren't to a product, but to the processional crafting, processional birthing. 

John 1:02:30
It's a critical midwifery is to respect that boom.

Chris 1:02:43  
Yeah of course. And there's a way in which the practice of midwifery, when it becomes reflective, can afford access to the unthinkable in ways otherwise accessible. So what you were saying about having a self that subsists ahead of you, seems to draw you forth and beckon. One thing that I've noticed, is that reflecting on the process of maturity, is being able to notice when the current state of your relation with others and with the world is completely supercedent to what was possible for yourself 10 years ago. Being able to look back and think well, who I am now, the relation to the way I figured my life or the way that my life has figured me out is such that 10 years ago, I could not have conceived it. And being able to then interiorising that realization into a dialectic, I think allows us to cast that pattern forward. And I'm speaking horizontally, but in a way this opens to the verticality. But if my present is unthinkable to my past, and my future is unthinkable to my present. And that imagination affords, that reflection affords, then avails this tension between the self that draws forth ahead of me.

John 1:04:51  
So are you saying the way, I come to appreciate the real possibility of others, and that is disclosed to me in their vulnerability. There's a sense of which I have to appreciate the real possibility of the world. And when that discloses itself to me, that's something like the world's vulnerability. Is that what you're saying? Because that's what I'm hearing from that.

Chris 1:05:24  
Yeah, I think so.

John 1:05:25  
Yeah, that's good. I like that. I want to clap my hands. Really good.

Guy 1:05:32  
One thing that I just want to highlight is the experience I'm having. So when you asked that question, I literally spun around, and I just watched myself attempt to answer. It was so obvious that I had to go wider and wider and wider. At a certain point, it was almost like my vision went all the way back and it touched. Like, in this way that you do this. This is way that you weave deep technical terms in I-thou poetry that's just so prosaic. And you start weaving in, marrying me to it or something like that, it was the experience of reference I felt, but then that thing about vulnerability. I like the thing that you said about time, how the future is the unthinkable to the present. Well, what do you know, it's interesting if you think about being vulnerable, what that means. And intimacy, if we say, of all the things that are going through my mind, what are those things that, if I say them, will open the possibility of intimacy. At least in perfect personal intimacy. But I think if I don't have the experience of being understood or accepted, I will feel pain. But there's a distinction that we talk about in different places that we come from in communication, in circling. We draw this contrast between what is it to speak with the intention to relate and the opposite of that? And we say, when you're not speaking with the intention to relate, not open towards intimacy. May have been more of the intention to control, meaning I'm saying what I'm saying so that the future after I'm done is not anonymous to me. It's got that quality. But there's something about intimacy where you really are saying the truth in it, whatever that is for you,  to the degree that when you get done saying it, now you have no idea what's going to happen next. And that experience is the first breath of intimacy. So there's just making this link to the vulnerability world. 

Chris 1:08:31  
Thank you for that, Guy. That's beautiful. I love this idea of deanonymizing the world. That's cool.

John 1:08:39  
Yeah, Jordan really liked it, too. So like, you're kind of I-thouing the world without necessarily personifying the world, and that's a way of entering into sacredness

Chris 1:09:03
Which explains then how the social relation transmuted into the existential and ontological relation, that the I-thou dynamic becomes the means of relating to the world.

John 1:09:19  
Yeah, no, this is definitely some deep conceptual glue here. Yeah, this is putting sticking things together. For me, that was a really good point, Guy. 

Jordan 1:09:30
Take the implication, if you glue that together with what Chris said earlier, in terms of your, the intelligibility of your future self to your present self or your presence up to your past self. And thinking about that in the context of the choice, right, he's gonna actually presented it as a choice, intent. And so we can even say that, to the degree to which I make choices such that my present self is in fact extremely intelligible to my past self. Mm hmm. And from fact not actually been living in a particular way. So just actually a very interesting that I shall live such that my future self is in comprehensible to my present self, becomes an aesthetic ethic invitation. Fully live into the moment that my future self is so far. So deanonymize my brain.

John 1:10:24  
That's very good. That's interesting, I think what you just did, Jordan, is something deeply analogous to the divine double which plays such a crucial role in the neoplatonic dialectic. The divine double is exactly that, it's divine because it's beyond us. It's incomprehensible, but it is the destination to which we are called.

Guy 1:10:53  
Here brings this conversation that John and I had last time, which was just this dialogue that we're having. And in dialogue, is it possible that we can maybe look at the heart of what gives the dialogue the realization, the divine double of the dialogue itself? 

John 1:11:22  
Yes. I remember that, Guy. Thank you for bringing that in. The divine double of the dialogue itself. And I've experienced a bit of that in circling I've done, and I'm going and reading other people's reports, they often report something like that. I think that's a very relevant thing. There seems to be indications of something like that all through Plato's work. There's often a sense of a God being present. Like it might be Apollo, is it the phaedrus at the end, where he Socrates placed praise to Pan, but there's a sense of a God being present throughout the dialogue, and not an intrusive way. Not a pundit but you know, in a fashion like you're describing, Guy. There's a divine double to the dialogos itself. Yes, yes.

Chris 1:12:36  
And then that divine double is the agapically creative potential of that dialogos.

John 1:12:44  
The trouble with us, we have 2000 years of a particular interpretation of that word, creation. That could take us off course because it's not like god.

Chris 1:13:09  
Yeah. Creative, in a more sort of spontaneous, this fertility, like that kind of spontaneous that efflorescence sense of creation.

John 1:13:21  
No, I wasn't actually saying that you should change your term. What I was saying is we should emphasize the adjective rather than just the noun. The agapic creativity, not the noun, but the framing adjective because I think that's more like it.

Guy 1:13:39  
But back to that question of vulnerability, the world where I can't quite tell, is it the divine double seeing us into existence, or are we seeing it to an existence? 

John 1:14:00
The same eye by which I see God is the eye by which he sees me. That's Eckhart.

Guy 1:14:09  
Like a deep inner (interweaving) ability.

John 1:14:16  
Yeah, exactly. And I hadn't picked up on it before. But this, this dialogos we're having is really affording me sense into Eckhart. Because I always took that statement to be very informative but I'm sensing Eckhart was saying something much more now. Because you know, there's that intimacy, the reciprocal opening, the vulnerability. There's so many of the notes that we have been saying are now singing in that statement of Eckhart's that I didn't hear before. Like I understood it to be a strong indication of participatory knowing within neoplatonism, but now I can hear it all, the divine doubling, the mutual vulnerability, disclosure, the deanonymizing. All of that is happening, in that phrase.

Chris 1:15:20  
Yes. And when the dailogos functions in this sacral way, the identity of the conversing is identical to them, integral to that blending of identity. I'm not even sure exactly what I mean by that, but it occurs to me. But what do we mean by that, when the dialogue becomes an entity unto itself, the verse of that identification, it seems to blend into the seeing organ, right?

John 1:16:12  
The process by which it comes into its identity is also the process by which the intelligibility of the dialogos is coming out. 

Guy 1:16:34  
I'm really getting the sense is throughout the recognition, we can have both positions.

John 1:16:44  
Do you mean by that, that sometimes I feel I'm speaking and sometimes I feel like I'm being spoken. Yes, totally.

Guy 1:16:52  
Some point you can randomly go down to what's happening, and I can find myself in one or the other in there. There's something important that maybe both of them happen and in that they can happen that is itself its own. 

Jordan 1:17:11  
Yes. Yeah. And there's a certain like artfulness or skillfulness, of actually being able to be in relationship with that feeling and that sensation, so it's moving very smoothly.

Chris 1:17:23  
The metaphor I keep coming back to when I think about this is, like an electrical conductor. It's conducting something, which is commensurate with this idea that it's not fabricated or contrived but it's also not whole. Either there's some meeting, has that meeting quality and the conducting metaphor to me speaks because then it also speaks to consequence circuitry that you can cultivate to support the conducting. And it also loops. And then if you blend the two metaphors, two analogies together, that's something.

Guy 1:18:28  
I feel high. I feel very expanded, yea.

Jordan 1:18:33  
Yeah, I'm actually finding myself hoping that somebody who watches this, will be very deeply on profound strong drugs right now. 

Guy 1:18:45
Well, if they've gotten this far, they are. Wow, so this is a really interesting contract, but I'm getting ready to work with a couple who are coming to me because they want to get a divorce. So we're having this last conversation, to look at what can be possible. And I feel like just from this conversation, I feel completely prepared. 

Chris 1:19:25  
That's very touching.

John 1:19:26  
Yeah, that's good. That's what you see at the end of platonic dialogues. There's often no argumentative resolution, but people will say, now I want my sons to spend time with Socrates. People now feel somehow that they've come into a change, but that doesn't mean that they've come to a definition or an argumentative conclusion. There's been some different resolution, in the sense of your vision being resolved, rather than coming to a conclusion.

Chris 1:20:02  
Yeah, they become by affinity--

Guy 1:20:03
--and walk away from this a lot more coordinated.

John 1:20:09  
Yea. Well said. That's a good way of thinking of it too, that kind of multi dimensional coordination, being what comes out of socratic dialogues.

Jordan 1:20:26  
Check this out. It's funny, I think it does feel like we're actually coming to a natural closure. I'm noticing the things that I put out in the beginning, are now beginning to land. So in the process of this particular conversation, all of us have this feeling of coming out of this more capable of coordination. Now, Guy's about to enter into a relationship, where his capacity will afford higher degree of coordination among those he's in relationship with. And this will for sure, having been through a divorce, afford at the very least an amelioration of a degradation of capacity, and may afford a higher increase of capacity for coordination. So this is that gift, the plenitude, the thing that by doing it, we increase the capacity to do, which increases the capacity, to which increases, and ongoing. There seems to be no reason to believe that there would be any end to that.

John 1:21:31  
I agree with that very wholeheartedly. Yeah.

Jordan 1:21:37  
Yes, it increases your capacity, as Chris said, to step into that future, so as to most fully make your path incomprehensible. It increases your capacity to step more fully onto that path, and to walk that straight and narrow path, which our friends Paul and Jonathan would tell us was named long ago.

John 1:22:02  
See, there's always the benevolent ghosts surrounding any dialogue. 

Guy 1:22:12  
Right, through escape and it just becomes invisible at a different level. Well, with everybody, thank you so much,

John 1:22:27  
Yeah, I want to thank everybody too, and I'm glad this was recorded. It's going to be extremely beneficial to the project that I'm engaging in, there's just a lot of gems and what happened here today. A lot of stuff being connected and put together. One of the things I was really interested about is, this was exemplifying what I'm after. We seem to be moving between something that has aspects of circling, but also aspects of philia sophia. And we're discussing what is coordination, what is vulnerability? There's a topic under discussion, but there's also the circling, and the invocation of the distributed cognition. Like, we were exemplifying exactly what I'm seeking for. So thank you for that very much. 

Guy 1:23:20
And it's a wonderful harmony. Yes. Do it at the grocery store. Like, at some level, I just want to highlight that, really, we're just doing something on one level that we do out all the time. Anyways, that the medium can afford this isn't something that I think. Yeah, yeah. I mean, what is life other than the conversation very continuously, so I feel much better able to converse with all of you. Thank you.