Interviewer 0:06  
So Jordan, you wrote a piece, a situational assessment in the wake of the Trump election that went kind of viral. And so what I'd like to do is kind of recap some of what you've talked about in your latest one for 2019. and see whether the overview that you put forward at the time of the Trump election, that it was gonna be a revolutionary war, it was already a revolutionary war, and that this was about the different phases of the insurgency versus the existing structure, what you've called the blue church, and if so, where are we in that? in that frame? Well, I think it since I went ahead and 2018-2019, ask that question and answer that question in the affirmative. 

Jordan 1:10
I'm gonna go ahead and stick to my guns and say, yes, just to take the event of the Trump election and endeavouring to make sense of what was going on in the context, that particular event I'm coming at it from a perspective that it's it's taking place in a larger context. So within that larger context, I can take a look at with that particular event. say there's some some things that I noticed that I would like to point attention to. And, and in that pointing attention to identified for things that are calling, I was gone front. So I used the metaphor of war. And the proposition was that in fact, it was really more than a metaphor, that perhaps we're actually experiencing something that is a closer to war than, say politics.
They have to reference your von Clausewitz to go deep on that notion. So in the context of there being something akin to a war going on, and what might that were looked like identified four distinct fronts, that if you were to watch those fronts, you might get a better sense of what's happening, and maybe even a better way of making choices of acting. In the fronts had to do with one relationship was a relationship between The the media, the mass media and the emergent media. Another front had to do with the relationship between what I was calling the insurgency and the deep state. The next front had to do with globalism and the relationship between globalism and what next question mark. And then the last had to do with this conflict of the cultural level that I identified as being between something called the blue church and then something that I was naming the red religion. If you recall, which I'm sure you do, I sort of found those terms sitting out on a Reddit and said, there's a really good terms for what's being described here. And particularly like the nuance between church and religion, that many people sort of crossover. So if you walk down those fronts, and they're obviously related to each other, because it's more so they're part of a larger complex. 
If you look at the first front from 2016 to two contemporary, I think it's not particularly obscure that it's a front at the notion of was the fake news is the envy of the people is now it has been an explicit statement, which wasn't in 2016. And that evolution has continued and the notion of there being a antipathy and natural, intrinsic deep separation and conflict between something the mainstream media, whatever we may consider that to be. And something else, this notion of the insurgency, whatever we think that is, I think is perfectly framed quite obvious that there's certainly something going on there. Now, that by itself may not be in fact fully disruptive. But the notion of you starting to get real salvos being fired across this divide. And the degree to which the underlying legitimacy of the mainstream media has now been quite significantly undermined. 
I mean, I would say that the the amount of legitimacy that it had in Rush Limbaugh followers in the late 90s, I think has moved into sort of 55% of the population like it's assumed to be biased, deeply, deeply biased with an agenda. And now it's assumed to be biased and incompetent. It's not a very solid foundation upon which to build something. So I also predict that this was more or less going to go this way. Now, in the in the larger context, of course, the frame is that there's many, many different things that are going on that are deeper than what we're seeing. And if you look at the deeper stuff to really make sense of what's happening, and one of the things that I pointed out in that in that particular series was this notion of media, the way the different media generate different landscapes upon which these kinds of conflicts can occur in the metaphor of are you fighting in the desert you fighting in the jungle, and if a certain medium that produces jungles is replaced by a meeting that produces deserts then People who are optimized for jungle warfare going to find themselves in a desert are going to be in deep trouble. Right? So just watch what's happening underneath and then see as the battle ships. And the proposition, of course, is that a big piece of what's happening? A very big piece after that's not the dominant he's been a big piece is this transition between centralized broadcast, linear media, most notably TV to decentralized, symmetric, oftentimes nonlinear. Not temporarily. Continuous media. It happens. We use the internet, the internet has discontinuous news, different better term for asynchronous, asynchronous. 
So when I'm watching a TV program, there's a flow to it. That is happening moment after moment and my ability, think 1977 to go to the bathroom and come back. I've missed something. There's something that's happened is objectively in a flow. Whereas on the internet, of course, that's not the case. So just hit pause, or even I just hit close, come back and hit open again, right? So there's a different thing going on there. So you got very, very, very distinct underlying media topographies. And these give rise to massive shifts and the stuff that happens on top of that, that's the one of the deep thesis or at least one of the deep theses that I read in the store. So if you come back up, well, what is the insurgency in some sense, the insurgency is people who have figured out how to use this new medium to accomplish their ends. It's just the equivalent of the Viet Cong figuring out how to engage in guerrilla warfare in the jungles of Vietnam, to actually fight to a standstill, the world war two era ish American army, and that's that kind of idea. So it's an insurgency playing this new battlefield, honed to the new characteristics of this new environment, playing its people who are designed to fight the old war. 
So it's Did a complete that eventually the sides going to lose. And as we're watching, it happened, we can see the brakes of currency as the sand keeps getting swept out from underneath the wall. How does the wall crumble? That makes sense. So then you move to the next stage. The next front, this is the front where much more of the energy is actually taking place from my perspective, and it has to do with something between the deep state and, again, the insurgency. There's different language that used to describe it over over time. But here when I want to talk about the insurgency, I want to be clear that there's a broader sense of that. So there's a conservative since the Trump administration, but there's a broader sense, which includes other kinds of things like in 2019. I called out the ID W and Q and on our part of that phenomenon. The Donald on Reddit is a part of the insurgency and was named after Donald Trump. 
It isn't causally linked, but he doesn't control it. It doesn't control him is just happening, and I would say has more influence and impact and it's more fully of the essence of the insurgency than the administration itself is, for example. So the conflict between the Deep State and the insurgency is of the same sort, except in this case, the deep state is deeper, it has a lot more going on a lot more capacity, a lot more degrees of freedom with which to operate. And we might even say in many senses, the mainstream media is happening appear is an aspect of are deeply connected. They're not one to one but they're deeply connected to each other. So here we're talking about a whole broad category of institutions and bureaucracies that have the characteristic of lifers, you know, people who work there for 40 years, and so they tend to know each other. And then when you add to the the fact that they tend to know each other because they've just been living and working the same kind of place for a long time and have a certain affiliation with the institutional structure they're attached to say for example, more than broader context. 
You add to that the notion of they actually have, over the past 70 or 80 years, began to develop personal relationships, they married each other, or they married to their siblings. And so there's a meshing as that happens among the context of this, this cluster of things I'm talking about a place like Harvard, and the relationship between, say, Harvard and the State Department. There's a lot of cross fertilization, people moving back and forth. And there's even situations where a person happens to be the head of some particular division of Harvard might be married to them as a head of a certain division of the State Department. This is perfectly normal, or they just travel in similar circles and have lots of bonds. And so it's a consequence, the deep state, which has a relationship with institutions, bureaucracies, people who have long term relationships with that, and binding has a consistency to it and it acts in the world as an agent, or as kind of agenda and I propose less obviously, that the deep state in the insurgents are also in conflict. There was another major proposition. 
And I would say that we've seen that we've seen in the in the context of the Mueller investigation in the number around, it's going to be another term that describes the Russia gate problem with the term that this used, I don't know, but I'm semantically assuming the word gate will be attached to it in Russia, the beginning. I believe with the FBI putting together some notion of what was it called insurance policy that this is just a peek into, it's obviously machinations of, of the sort that will always be happening. It's inevitable, people are doing things, they will do things within the scope of their agency. But we've been watching that play out over a couple of years. And if you have a sense of the way that these kinds of things tend to play out, historically.
From my perspective, is kind of been on script. You see the kind of thing happened that you saw with Russia gate and you see with the new report emerge And what you haven't normally seen is the recipients of that treatment continue to kind of just Bob above the surface. And there's clearly something about Trump himself as an individual that has very, you know, he makes slick Willy look like Velcro. There's a lack of friction in him, which is notable. But also, I point out the concept that the insurgency because it's operating in the context of this decentralized medium, in a very flat graph has called an ooda loop. That's very rapid. And that means is this is a concept from military theory or strategy, observe, orient, decide, act. And then obviously, when you act, you do something in in the world, and then you observe again to see what happened. And the proposition is, is that broadly speaking, the more bandwidth you're literally pass, but you said the more information that said you can push through the Italy faster. Both combined, the more strategic capacity that you have. So, more or less, a noodle loop with higher bandwidth will continue to loop with lower bandwidth. The proposition is that the insurgency is tapped into something a network decentralized collective intelligence that is running a much, much faster loop than the deep state. The Deep State is my think of them just like very simply, the deep state is running 1519 church or both? 
What we're going to go to the bootrec Next, and right now I'm just partitioning them as part of a story of these things going deeper, deeper levels. So yes, but right now we're on the deep state. So when I think of the Deep State is running in 1950s era server farms, like you've ever, ever seen with this look like just big rooms full of ENIAC machines with tape drives, and there's big rooms and lots of them doing for a long time and they're controlling all kinds of like big lumbering robots and die. Or metaphor is quite appropriate. And then the insurgency is connected to a bunch of Fortune one kids on cell phones unfortunate that quite literally. And now we have the metal metaphor, it's smaller and has less focused capacity to deliver significant directed energy, but it's faster and it's extremely responsive. So as the deep state sort of winds up and fires off its its agenda. So for example, the concept of fake news, if you wind back the clock actually emerged from the deep state, before it was co opted by the insurgency is a very specific moment. We saw it come out through sort of the ordinary channels. And then what happened was that the the insurgency, co opposite and converts it and begins mutating and so rapidly, you could just sort of see the deep state sort of out back on its heels wondering what the hell happened. And the conflict has been locked since then. 
And of course, in the meantime, over the past several years, the DEA state's been mutating has been evolving. Those strategies that don't work are being dropped has trying to find new ones and different groups. coming in to try to form something happening on this side, but it's all still more or less running the basic code of the deep state we should just say running the blue church, right? So we'll get there. And then on the insurgency, it of course has also been evolving and mutating and gathering. And so the ITW emerges and queuing on emerge. And from my perspective, as examples of something happening more in alignment with the essence or more line with the grassroots characteristic of the generator function that's coming up. 
That's the Trump insurgency, from my perspective is a phenomenon kind of like a cork floating on a wave. And the wave came and it's been able to ride or actually surfer riding on the wave, it's even better metaphor. They've been able to figure out how to ride that wave and surf it and show up as having directionality and agency on their own. But it's the wave that matters. In senses we can kind of skip the globalism peace gets to happen that fast. I mean, I remember way back in the day when things Like the Trans Pacific Partnership had a characteristic of really seriously scary, how the hell are we going to stop this fight this kind of a thing. And they just woke up one day and was completely gone. And of course, we've seen the a lot of the machinery of globalism has just been NAFTA is gone. It's just amazing the rapidity with which that's been evaporated. And I think that's largely because it never really established a strong position in toslink. So the globalism was fundamentally still a an American to a lesser extent, eu functions. So as the forces of decentralization have been happening at this level, this doesn't have a whole lot of its own coherency.
So I continue to believe that that will continue to evolve. And, of course, that's an area that has anyone who understands the history and political theory is reasonably concerned because any shift from a hedge of money to a multipolar structure generally goes badly doesn't always but generally goes badly. That doesn't mean the multipolar structures aren't themselves able to achieve stability over periods of time. But what it does mean is that the shift is tricky. So, to the degree to which we are watching something where the notion of an American hegemony, which was in some sense, showing up as globalism, the neoliberal globalist consensus is breaking down, and there's a move towards multipolar nationalism or something else. And by the way, I don't think that stable. We're in a moment of significant potential risk in small movements, if anybody decides they want to reach for the brass ring. Then it creates a cascade of conflict.
So then we have the the last front, which is the culture for the culture war, and here I talked about The blue church in its in its specificity. And my proposition is the blue church is deeper than these other ones. So it's, it's closer to the center of what's happening. And on the other side, now, I've talked about the red religion, which is deeper than the insurgency is closer to the essence of what's happening. And both of these are happening at the level of culture. So, here, we have to actually think about how culture manifests itself up into causation. But maybe we'll get there in a second. So just for clarity, we're talking about the blue church. What I'm talking about are what I propose that means is a certain way that culture is able to be and do in a context. So the blue church is a given very specific instantiation of this kind of thing. 
In an essay I read about the blue church in particular, I call that for example, that the Victorian consensus that Victorian synthesis as something of the same kind, same kind of organism, cultural organism that you'd like, and that, over the period between World War One through the end of World War Two that collapsed and a new one formed and as a whole bunch of things that go inside that box, but broadly speaking, you have things like how media technologies, enable groups, large groups of people to be able to make sense together, make choices together and act effectively together, right, so basically forming a noodle loop as a group. And so boutrous was that sort of thing. And its characteristic had to do with this sense of broadcast, a sense of whether you're talking about in school, there's a student, so there's a teacher, and there's a bunch of students. So asymmetry, and passivity, one unit direct now, agency lives in the center in the broadcaster and reception lives in the in the receiver and there's a lot more received. There are broadcasters, you see that basic topology show up over and over and over again over the period of the second half of the 20th century. 
And the blue church is, in some sense, built around that or uses that as a primary components, like the skeleton, the muscles of the blue church, or that. And it was talking about the who, who are who are characteristic representatives of the blue church, or our arch bishops in the church. And again, somebody like Harvard, an entity like Harvard would be an example the State Department would be an example, particularly like Kennedy's State Department would be an example you can see like how much those things connect a sense of meritocratic verticality. NASA is an example of a blue church organization. meritocratic verticality and then g like six sigma, highly efficient, effective bureaucratic actuation down That's that kind of a structure. G, the classic example. So noticed a lot of these examples are 1970s. Right? The blue church was at its highest and most clear, pristine in the late 70s. And has been in the process of decline since then. decline, both because these kinds of systems have a built in like a rust or atherosclerosis. They become burdensome in and of themselves and become less efficient just on their own.
They're also subject to various forms of corruption, the longer they're around, and in this case, the underlying basis, the source of a lot of the structure of the blue church, I broadcast media has shifted into the blue church is suffering for three distinct maladies simultaneously. And it shifted to this new place, right? So we have something where we have an old mature strong, well functioning, I mean, not well functioning but long functioning. Structure The blue church Which accelerates, for example, through the deep state through the mainstream media that is in the state of decline. And then we have this new emergent thing, the red religion, which is in the state of ascension, trying to figure out how to do stuff. And I think the developmental metaphor of a biological organism is quite good. If you take a look at the age, you might say that the blue churches say, in their mid 80s, and they've been smoking and drinking a bit much, so it's not a healthy 80s. And then the red religion is maybe 14. So that's kind of that's a good sense of the shape of it. Maybe not the 80s. Maybe they were in there, even though the 60s but it's not a healthy 60s. There's something about that. And so, so what is the red religion, religion is, first of all red, and I need to kind of dial in on why it's red, and what that means for us Long Term Evolution. So before we get there and just talk about religion versus church, and then We'll talk about blue versus red. So, the church leanness of the blue church was mostly what I was talking about its form, the way it shows up. 
The balloon is the content is, as far as I can tell a little bit of just an accident that over the period of the 20th century, when blue, which in the US kind of represents the political left, and red, political right ran into each other and conflicted, blue won the culture war. So by the mid 80s, blue had one and it was in the process of them propagating itself out into the social field. So most of the engines of the blue church are running blue, code running, running blue content, they tell the stories and blue values, it's actually more to the point. And while there was in the 50s, for example, a red church that was running red, that's more that's gone. And so, so now switch quickly to the notion of a red religion, religion and come back redness. So the idea of religion is this idea that there is less formal structure. It's like the Protestants versus the Catholics. It's a much more of a peer to peer bottoms up grassroots spontaneous formation, building up something that maybe looks like structure but it's actually made of, of sand, they can fade right back and go back out into the into dust. 
And this of course, is the natural way that organization will happen in something like the internet in something like a asynchronous, symmetric, decentralized, and by the way, digital communications medium. And so you see the, the meme wars are great example me more than the blue church look like Madison Avenue. And they look like a small number of potentially quite talented individuals, trying to figure out what will sell and maybe using focus groups to hone their message and then firing it out with a lot of intensity through all channel Whereas with the meme wars effects of the red religion is self organizing self assembling. Essentially everybody is participating in the kind of bubble up. And certain ones certain means that kind of vaguely going the right direction get picked up, mutated, replicated, disseminated, picked up and repeated, replicated and disseminated. And what works is sort of naturally grasped and felt and evolved in real time. And by the way, in the process of evolving in real time, orients attention in the organism towards those streams that evolved those that one.
So a good example would be the NPC main maybe from the MPC name is fantastic. I mean, think about it, if you watch it, and you can we live in a digital world, you can literally just zoom back the clock and see it emerge. And there was a tweet from a gamer using the NPC metaphor. Don't be an NPC, which to gamers means something very obvious and simple, right? Don't be something that is driven by non agency that has, by the way, sort of characteristic stupidity and simplicity to it, then just run scripts. But the, because a lot of people in the red religion, whether we're gamers, I think it landed and then it got picked up and it hit its stuff, there was something about it the generated in effect. So it was both on this side and the red side it was felt as. Yep, that makes sense that that lands I get it, I kind of grok the essence of it. And then oh, these guys don't like it very much a press press the attack. And so it was a spontaneous formation. And then it spread, huge amount of energy was pointed to figuring out how to modify it and move it into deeper and deeper levels of effectiveness. And by the way, effectiveness in the sense of like being cool, figuring out how to be the one who integrates the thing that everybody else picks up. Oftentimes, by the way, anonymously, so it's not being cool and becoming a centralized point. But I don't know being cool, like just in the in the moment and then also, what is uptaken what sticks in goes in. 
And of course, as we watched over a period of very briefly, like two weeks, it dominated, dominated the entirety of the social media environment, to the point that centralized structures like Twitter, had to modify their basic rule structure, and roll out entirely new approaches to try to combat that thing, of course, is the classic example of trying to squat you know, 100 million flies, and whack a mole whack a mole. Well, like a fly because there's hundreds of millions of them, and they're stinky. And okay, you just wiped out the entirety of the NPC meme. Who cares by the time Twitter had moved to swipe it, the red religion already moved on to something else. And and the damage was done, because now you remember Julian Assange his point, way back in the day when wiki leaks came out, the bureaucracies are already dead, because to the degree to which they are subject to negative risk from leaks, they basically have two choices, or three, they can either just take it on the chin Then ultimately lose because they're subject to negative risk, they can endeavor to constrain leaks, which means significantly increasing the internal policing, where they can radically reduce the amount of communication engaging in any one of those three cases. They're shrinking their sphere of operations dramatically. 
Same basic idea here, right? The idea is that the loop of the insurgency is moving so rapidly, that when something like Twitter moves, it's actually hurting itself more than it's hurting the insurgency. And basically, the insurgency is using its capacities to cause the blue church to punch yourself in the face. Over and over again, question that comes up, like the insurgency in the red religion, are they synonymous and also and also, because you you mentioned the ITW? Like, would you identify that as part of the insurgency?
Right? Yeah. So if I think about it is like layer cake layers up, the red religion is more basic than the insurgency. The red religion is at the level of values. The level of strategy, the insurgency is more at the level of purpose at the level of goals. It's endeavoring to do something. You may have incidents which is the level of aesthetics extensibility. And so, the insurgency is a manifestation of the red religion, which is itself a manifestation of just religiousness, which I was trying to describe. And in that sense, the ITW is also a manifestation of that same kind of thing, which is to say it's showing up as a bottoms up self organizing structure that is powered, by the way by the energy of this new kind of medium with this new medium makes available. And as such, it is a natural ally. So you could say that is part of the insurgency unconsciously. But remember, I made a distinction between the Trump administration and this thing down here, which is by definition, decentralized, so it's not a there's no point on which you can say that's in charge. 
So to the degree Which the idea that he was doing this kind of thing functionally and effectively visa V, the mass media than it is acting as part of the insurgency, and its expression of religion and his risk and it gets interesting. So this is actually a really nice point. So remember, I wanted to focus the difference between the redness and the religionist piece. So the redness is again kind of a historical artifact. Red was the losers the last war, so they weren't distracted by trying to run old machinery, they didn't have any old machinery to run, they were given the beautiful opportunity to have to learn new things. And so, the value structures, the sensibility, the even the dispositional types, who were disempowered by the loss of the culture of the 20th century, found themselves in a evolutionary under evolutionary pressure. And so they therefore more rapidly figured out how to begin playing the game in this space. They playing the religion game as opposed to the church game, playing the network game as opposed to the broadcast game. As you'd mentioned, by the way, they also evolved mimetic defense mechanisms, the same tools that have been used in the culture wars the 20th century, calling someone a racist, for example, which still kind of decimates people who are from the 20th century has very little impact on people who are truly coming from the grass like 4chan doesn't care at all, like it doesn't have any impact at all. 
So there's two distinct things like one has to do with the semantic emotional language games that happened and the other one has to do with the Moodle loop organizing collective intelligence piece. And the redness of the red religion has to do with the artifact of a particular dispositional group. kinds of people with backgrounds and values found themselves having to figure out how to new use new tools. They figured out how to use those new tools and then began to have some success initially, and by the way GamerGate as far as I can time in there, obviously the earlier examples that was the first time that I think we really saw the red religion had a certain self consciousness or a win win if I think it's probably better put and notice that they want to fight.
Surprisingly. So this begs the question of could it be a blue religion, and of course, busy need to be red or blue because many senses the notion of red and blue is itself an artifact of kind of the landscape of the past century, the last two centuries, something like that is if you go back far enough, that doesn't make a whole lot of sense. Maybe 50,000 years, but at some point, it dissolves back into the the basics of humaneness. So, obviously, there could be a blue religion is sort of requestion and then 2019. I pointed out the fact that perhaps with AOC we're beginning to see the merchants of that right so there's a blue content ludonarrative blue store of value. Showing up expressing themselves, but now express themselves in a way which is very, very obviously different than the blue church.
And so AOC and Nancy, she's an insurgent, in the democratic in in blue, she's a loser Lou insurgency. And operating in the same sensibility as the red, but because of the different valence of the topology of blue, the dispositions, the values, the aesthetics, and, and the relationships and the position where they actually have back actually happen to be it shows up differently and will continue to evolve differently. So a different kind of organism in this new environment. So sort of the difference between Adam no Jaguar and a crocodile I both are predators both happen to live in the rain forest that quite different because they have different origin stories, and neither will do well in the desert. 
And both are very effective in their particular sub niche of the broader ecosystem. Okay, so then we can kind of move to the Peace, when I wrote was writing this pieces actually wrote it four fronts, and then line then here's the deeper story. So now we're kind of the deeper story. Of course, the deeper story is all of the superstructure that we're talking about even culture. But certainly media and bureaucratic institutions and globalism and particular political parties and particular political candidates are many ways ephemera their their their dust in the wind in the context of the bigger movements that are happening underneath. And historically, we've seen this happen many times. I think a nice one happens to be the kind the 15th 16th century transition around the Gutenberg Bible if you want to just use media as one line, right, the shift of the church in the classic sense to everything that followed after science, capitalism, the nation state and the line that happened there. You know, a lot of stuff changed you feudalism shift into a completely different political structure, economic political structure. 
Religion shifted from Catholic meaning truly universal to meaning one among many competing narratives and stories and structures in etc. And even underlying human concepts of the nature of live reality. You know, the Copernican revolution happened in that context. The Darwinian revolution happened in that context as those massive shifts are happening. And we're in a circumstance that is, at least as if not more significant in terms of the magnitude of the shift from this broadcast style to this decentralizing style media, and therefore the culture that will emerge on top of it. And therefore the institutional structures, economics, political structures that will merge on top of that is going to undergo at least as much of a shift, right so looking at a massive change, and the change that we're seeing up here are just kind of evidence of it. If you're pulling Some sort of boat through the water, and all you can see the boats invisible. So all you can see is the waves. We're seeing those are the waves and the even the bow waves we're looking at, okay, here's the boat that's making them.
And so for example, in this kind of context, red and blue begin to become very problematic, you start to see a lot more possibility of smaller chunks. And we already seen that, like we're seeing, for example, the balkanization of blue, which is sort of naturally going to balkanize anyway, but showing up as having lots and lots of little sub communities that are perhaps looking to find coherence in and of themselves. And there's a really nice essay that was written culture war two, I think, Peter Limburg, where he just enumerated a list of like 13 or 15 of them, and how they showed up in some scenes, tribes, mimetic tribes, as we call them. Yeah, it's a very nice term, which is hilarious Of course, because it begs the question of what does mean even mean to you, and what makes nomadic tribe you're in, will in some sense answer that question. So we start getting some very interesting stuff. referentiality of course, that's where we are, the, the postmodern condition, all the way down. And so my proposition, in fact, my prediction is, is that the story that we're watching is going to be a story that continues to see an increasing movement into vulcanization and fraction nating. But fractionating at the level below culture freshing the level of how we make sense of reality at all, and fractions, the level of how we collaborate, and come together as groups of people at all. 
And by the way, fractioning in these massive proliferation of agency, many, many, many different ways to actually shift and change reality that will be mutating, evolving at a accelerating pace. Because to the degree to which we have one shift, the shift from broadcast to decentralized, notice also the shifted decentralized carries with it is both a product of And an accelerant of technological innovation, collective intelligence that has the capacity to change its own environment. So this move is not just sort of a move from A to B, to move from A to B ness, or B is actually a dynamic processes implicitly accelerating. And so its movements kind of like static. To accelerate it, that's a very different gig or to say, velocity to accelerating feudalism to velocity to acceleration. And I think that's actually grewcock's liberationists, who I don't do very well, but I measured just recapitulated some certain things that they believe.
And so well, I mean, once you kind of settle there is okay, well, what does that imply, implies a lot, and can we can kind of go into that if you'd like. But that's the end of that story, that situational assessment ends there. And going back to sort of the blue church, and There's a sort of sense in in the article and it's breaking down increasingly quickly. I mean, the Covington story was a real was a real moment where I think a lot of people sort of looked at the media and thought, Wow, it's the picture that's being painted by the media is so off and so clearly dysfunctional. But you dated a little bit further back, you dated to the Cavanagh hearing? I do yeah. I mice. My sense was that was kind of the the last ride of the blue church. An effort to bring full church the power to bear on a thing that is this topic and subject of seriously capacity. Supreme Court Justice. I mean, there's very few objects that are more centralized and more concrete. 
We're talking about. If you're if the metaphors the blue Church has the feeling of like a big heavyweight boxer who can punch hard. This is somebody who's standing there with their chin punch, and what happened. They had actually shift their agency into the blue insurgency. So at that moment, the blue church did the thing that happens all the time. If you look at politically, they brought in the mercenaries right they brought in the the folks who are not part of their church structure intrinsically as allies. But if you watch what happened in cabina, all hell broke loose at the church suddenly was not in charge. They did not control the narrative, which is kind of their thing. And, and they lost but the losing wasn't matter. What mattered was they had to give power they had to actually give the game to a different kind of force.
What was the force and see that the the hashtag resist, hashtag me to, which are much more of the blue insurgency. John Robert stack has been quite specifically From his point of view, you have the insurgency. And then you have hashtag resist, right? And these are two blue, red, and they're coming from the same source and energy. And in my point of view happens to be that there's a lot of threads going on, but I wouldn't disagree. And so what ended up happening was they they move this from the Clarence Thomas, situation, that dynamic to a dynamic that suddenly was happening in real time in public on social media, and was being not just fueled, but then driven by the energy of the grassroots coming up, just like me more fair that I described before, the stories that were emerging, were happening from the bottom up and they were being up regulated in a decentralized fashion and to some extent, and somewhat clumsily and awkwardly, the people in the church. You know, Nancy Pelosi, and This lady from California so obsolete that I can't I don't even bother to store her name anymore. She was recently in another meeting where she told a bunch of kids don't tell me what to do. 

Int 41:00
Dianne Feinstein like, very clumsily trying to imagine that they were steering this ship, but obviously, not at all right, they were on the other side of the waterfall, riding the turbulence and it didn't take them where they wanted it to go. Do you have a sense that the the blue church broke decisively during Kevin and then Covington, for example, was was the flailing around of a broken sense making system?

Unknown Speaker  41:37  
Yeah, yes. To be sure. I think the the metaphor is nice actually had this really great quote where he talked about the idea that Buddha died and they should have shadow for 100 years. Something along those lines, the or the idea that I remember as a kid hearing this story that like a dinosaur would die because his brain was so small and far away from the body that wouldn't even know it was dead for like some meaningful amount of time, something like that. And the blue church, the back is broken, it is no longer a vital living homeostatic organism. But it still has a lot of energy. Right? So it's flailing as a good term. It's actually waiting capacity. It's ooda loop is now spiraling. And so it's going to increasingly actually a really good example here of being drunken fighter. So at Kevin, I reach that threshold point where it's actually a drunkard at a bar, for whatever reason keeps drinking, where it's no longer actually in control of its actions. It's suddenly unconsciously reacting to the environment, and it decides it's a really good idea to try to punch the bouncer and that's that's cabinet and then and then drink some more. It's now bleary eyed and it's swinging wildly, and as events are coming at it, it's responses are increasingly, obviously, what they are, and a lot of the blue churches power lives and fantasy Remember, TV has this characteristic of creating a fantastic sensibility, we project ourselves into a world that is not actually the world that we're in. 
Right? For me to believe that I am watching what's happening in the video has a feeling of it being present, but you reach for and you touch the screen, you don't touch the face to the person that's not 3d reality. And of course, even more characteristically, I'm watching the Avengers, which is really, really not reality. And yet, particularly for contemporary humans winged on that from childhood, it may be feels more real than real reality. So the blue church A lot of it is based upon that ability to invoke an instinct and a habit of fantasy to tell a story to everybody orient their attention choice making based upon a really well told story. And it's kind of the, the king is obviously not closed the story no longer has. stickiness is to obviously a story. There's two obviously a narrative This being created and forced down your throats through channels that are no longer even particularly effective at doing it, and somewhat silly, and it seems that the best metaphor is actually an awesome show. 
I believe it was Anderson Cooper, but I'm not sure exactly at a hurricane where you have an image of him standing there like holding the microphone and the wind's blowing and he's like up to his chin in the water and then you realize that it's all a fake it the whole thing's a setup is like two people walking by and rain boots. The winds not even blowing very hard, where you're like holy shit to set. This is the news, trying to show me an actual event in reality over here, and they are bald faced Dudley just creating a movie set. Okay, great. Now I know where we stand. What's reality really look like? Kind of like that. So that's the shift is the consciousness of that being the case. And the instinct that habit of Okay, every single time I encounter anything vaguely true, actually, I have to assume that it's an extremely deliberate intent to manipulate Probably coordinated in some fashion. You can obviously come with your store Eric Weinstein.

Int 44:00
Although it's not clear to me that is kayfabe in the sense that I'm not quitting the blue church minister faking, they may have you know, they've been drinking their own Kool Aid. They seem to believe a lot of their own stories, which is weird because they're also clearly, you know, making things up so hard to say but somebody somewhere is playing kayfabe on that side of the story. So then when you get to something like Cubana, so happens with Q and on is that if you come at it with a perspective, particularly with the blue church perspective, it's either going to look like so just to just to someone who maybe doesn't know what Q and on is, can we just recap exactly what it is it's an alternative narrative about just kind of a, either a conspiracy theory or an alternative narrative about what's going on, that has been sort of generated by either someone or some group of people on the internet.

Unknown Speaker  46:02  
Yeah, I'm a fair articulation the way I would say it is, there's a place on the internet called 4chan. And it has a characteristic of being both ephemeral and anonymous, meaning that posts are made text images. And they are attached to a truly anonymous identity. There's no particular way of finding out who it is. And there's an ethos of having of not trying to tell people that you are somebody. And it's on these boards that have a finite number of potential posts. And then once the board is done, the board is done in a whole new board has to be created. So there's a ephemeral and anonymous character to this place, which you just say it's really close to the essence of the kind of stuff that gives rise to this religion, or this decentralized network I'm talking about and October of 2018, I think 2017 supposed to shut up and that board has all kinds of crazy shit on it all the time is sort of known for just being crazy shit all the time. But some post showed up that claimed to be Having a particular inside knowledge that what was going on in a time frame by the way were what was going on was quite confusing to a lot of people and had a an aesthetic of asking questions, provocative questions, as opposed to giving answers and telling stories. And medically, remember this idea of the red religion identifies and up regulates things from the bottom up. 
This kind of worked, some attention was paid, some people seem to think that was cool, and it got disseminated. And then some more post showed up. Now, of course, you can't ever prove that there's actually the same person or group of people. There's whole points anonymous, but the synesthetic was used, and so some attention was paid to it. And then it got bigger and bigger, and then it got kind of big in that very small. Well, in that subcommittee, the small portion of the internet. And then there was some pair all kinds of craziness hard to happen and begin to percolate out more broadly started getting called Q. anon is just a term that refers to the fact that 4chan the chains are anonymous. And then a layer a number of startups. A round of interpreters and up regulators and people who are trying to make their own name on the basis of this meme and try to turn themselves into internet celebrities on the business of something else. Twitter followers, YouTube channels begin to build around it. And if you look at the center of it, the thing that was going on in the chance, there was in fact, in the center of the stream of questions, a narrative or set of narratives, answers to questions that were beginning to form. But notice the interesting invert, instead of it being built around answers and narrative that was giving you the answer to the question. 
This is what happened here. It's actually built around questions that opened up and generated an arbitrarily large like a vast panoply of narratives. Particularly for the first six to nine months it was hard to explain. epistemological unbound, like what could be true wasn't even centered, much less what was true, right so the number of stories are being created with Vast was a huge phone of narrative. And since then, over the past six months, kind of like religions do is begin to become more Orthodox. There's more of a here's the story, and has a counter narrative feel to it. So that's q&a. So the place that I think is most interesting is not its mature, and when might say sort of desiccated, modern current form, but rather what was going on in that first year. So the point where is exploding. And if you look at that first year or so it looks insane, like, almost gets in front of me insane. 
The number of things that were being proposed and the way they're being proposed, and the rate at which change was happening was not the kind of thing that happens in meritocratic hierarchies and could never possibly have been handled by a single Mind. But it didn't flat park it actually held and gathered meaningful amount of people who put their energy and time into it. And while the signal to noise ratio is pretty low, or the noise is high, there was in fact, also meaningful signals like real stuff was figured out and actually real predictions about future conditions that were more accurate. It was coming from CNN, we're also done. Not that hard, and it's a low bar, but any event it actually happened. Now the proposition that I'm making, which could be wrong, but the thing that I found most interesting is that in something like q&a, you're actually witnessing an even more fundamental version of the natural form of the collective intelligence that is bound to this new media environment. So if you look at the ITW that e w is a little bit like what happens when the church the structure becomes a little like takes it puts it lets his hair down, you know, chill out and be a little bit more flexible than the more open minded.
Come down with kunos coming up. So if you look at both of them, it's okay, what's the distance between them? that distance that's the distance that needs to be covered for the religious function, the new decentralized collective intelligence to close the gap, right? When something like human on something that that much flat, spontaneous self organizing capacity is able to generate a level of coherent thinking that daddy daddy was produced? Well, then you're on the other side of something.

Int 51:30
And if Q anon is the first manifestation of a new collective intelligence, what do you think the next one might look like? As you mentioned, by the way, I don't think it's the first. Bitcoin for example, is also a manifestation of the same basic driver. But it's a notable and obviously very early. So what was the question? What's next? Yes, if it's an early collective intelligence, what would what do you think the next one would look like?

Jordan 52:01  
Would it be even more virulent than q anon has been, it will, by definition be more beloved to Don, if it is not more valence and Q and on is not the next one. Now there's going to be an inner Meza with lots of experiments you want to be tried around the horizon? If you look at the human on horizon, there's lots of different ways of thinking about like, do you think about as a really powerful sign up? Do you think of as a really powerful propaganda device? Do you think of as a really powerful way to gather a lot of people to do your bidding by manipulating? Or do you think about it as a really interesting new way to do collective intelligence and since making lots of different versions of what might happen inside that space, and I would actually be surprised that we haven't already if called the children of Q and on having already happened in the cult bad side. covertly, there's likely already been a number of different experiments trying to figure out how to extend whatever the hell happened there into some new kind of effective tool in the war on sense making The world since making peace. 
I'd be surprised we haven't seen something that has learned from Cuba.
On the sense making side like how do we actually make sense together peace. The most important part is going to be some level of epistemological maturity. That's going to be the decisive factor. And what I mean by that is being aware of how sense making habits, being conscious of how your own sense making has happened, how you're showing up in terms of sense making, and then being mindful and deliberate, intentional about how one might go about collaborating in a decentralized bottoms up experience. Mental fashion that has a good epistemology behind it. I think that's the decisive factor. So while there may be some it's quite funny actually, if you use the blockchain as an example, remember, you had Bitcoin, they had this kind of cascade of light coins, all coins. There were more or less Bitcoin Junior variations on the theme. But they weren't that interesting, because they had a theorem, which was actually a very, like a whole new kind of idea. So there may be kind of alt coins in the queue and on space, but the next thing, the next real decisive innovation, that space is going to be something that has a self awareness to epistemological capacity and is bringing that into its design. 

Int 54:45
And do you think that will emerge from the trends from the same place that you're not came from?

Jordan 54:50  
That's a very good question. It is not particularly likely, but it's not impossible. This is because the chances are a Highly chaotic and very open environment, and are in fact capable of absorbing novelty at a relatively high rate. The individuals who typically spend time in the chance have a relatively immature epistemological foundation. And so as a consequence will not naturally be attracted in this direction. But if it does gain traction, it can grow. Because there has to be certain characteristics of the space where a collective intelligence could be created. And that doesn't feel like Twitter. It doesn't feel like Facebook, it doesn't feel like that. What are the minimum what kind of space is required for that collective intelligence to evolve? I mean, the chances are particularly as a particularly interesting, right petri dish, so you're provoking me into having a little bit of a dialogue around the nature of How the characteristics of a medium give rise to certain kinds of collective intelligence at a detailed level. So for example, you can compare the chance to Tumblr. 
And notice the distinctions, and notice how identity forms and Tumblr, and that is how social currency shows up in Tumblr. And that is how dirty forms in the chance how social currency flows in the chance. They're different, right? The characteristics at a low level are different Reddit different. Facebook different. And there's the difference between what happens when you have a light button and you don't have a light button. Even when you have a light button that has the blue hearts and smiley faces and just a thumbs up, right? There's these minor differences actually make a difference in terms of how collective intelligence naturally forms in a space. So the question you're asking is actually quite profound, what might be a kind of space that is conducive to this forum. collective intelligence and the first thing that comes to mind is, it will almost certainly not be purely virtual. Because the kind of thing that we're looking for is not available intrinsically, in the kind of ephemeral virtual weak links, connections that can happen on the internet in disembodied communication. So plausibly, at least, we're looking at something which is a arel vr combo, something where you actually have embodied relationship, real life virtual reality combo, sorry, it's real life versus virtual reality combo. 
That's able to have the bandwidth of interaction to explore epistemological novelty well And find ways to achieve collaboration achieve effective collective intelligence in a space of extremely high epistemological liminality then that can be extended through virtual means. But it seems to me plausible, but very unlikely that something like this can be formed in a highly virtual environment and certainly unlikely for it to be formed. First, it might be copied. Once the basic notion perhaps has been generated, you might see it copied to use software as a metaphor. If you think of let's just make q&a on version one.oh. It's not that let's just normalize their Look at say version one dot five, I can see something that that would happen in the domain of the rationalist epistemology, which would have game theory as a primary basis and therefore would be allegiance with the blockchain community. And that would be able to achieve a very high level of collective intelligence through virtual channels. 
You might even consider that it'd be perfectly viable version two and it would have a mature epistemology that would be able to be reasonably functional in the new place. So wouldn't have a evolving or novel epistemology? Do we have a mature one it'd be effective in the context of decentralized collective intelligence. A little bit like Sesame credit, if you know what I'm talking about the Chinese social currency structure, topological these two things will be roughly identical. And so what you would end up seeing is a potentially very rapid proliferation of a new form of collective intelligence, the quote, by the way, quite quite intelligent and effective. But it would it has a finite lifespan, and would actually achieve a closure collapse event and probably a relatively rapid time, like, maybe even years, almost certainly decades.
And I, by the way, I feel exactly the same thing about what's happening in China. So I think China is going in that direction. And you should expect to see a significant increase in collective intelligence, followed by a collapse, difficult to recover from collapse. And so to the degree to which you see something like that emerged in the Copy analytic tradition, the blockchain crypto space, decentralized but trying to figure how to make sense from that direction, you would see something that seems so it would have an S curve, the S curve would have significant, you'll be a hell of a lot better than the blue church. So when a lot of ground, but it would have a natural end and collapse in its lifecycle, for reasons that I can explain if you'd like to the sort of the first sense. You mentioned in passing the other day that even in Hollywood, there's a sense, I mean, there's a lot there's a sense that a lot of us have that we're kind of running out of either novelty or running out of the all the possibilities of being played out in almost every single medium simultaneously. And is that true? I mean, it just seems like watching Hollywood films now that they're increasingly derivative, there just seems to be we're going an increasingly smaller circles. 
It's very simple. When you have a system that is designed fundamentally to maneuver people around by manipulating them at the level of their instead of structures. After that the neuro chemical incentive structures, then what ends up happening is you have you get more and more competition for for controlling you by your dopamine and serotonin response curves gets pretty narrow, and it has half life to it. And so I have to give you more, I have to give you more, it has become more pure and more intense. And just run that across every dimension. So it's that curve, which by the way is the same more or less synchromesh just describing but in a different domain that we're witnessing in these frameworks. So Hollywood, you know, every movie has to be more visceral, more mellow, dramatic, and more intense in both of those dimensions. You know, we can't just have conflict on earth we have to accomplish in space, which if conflicts with physical conflict in space time, we have to act the entire universe has to be up for grabs, and it has to be up for grabs in the loudest possible way imaginable over as many hours as I can pin your ass to the seat so that you The effect that you used to get by watching a guy on a table going like this, Lance, it's just that it's the cocaine effect, or that's what I used to call it.
And it's not the same thing with social media. Yes, it's the same fundamental dynamic. And remember, it's a fundamental dynamic that's happening two dimensionally meaning it's happening in the sense of my ongoing addiction to Facebook. And it's happening and snapchat desire to move me from Facebook to Snapchat. So it's a co evolutionary competitive dynamic to yank me around by my limbic system.

Int 1:03:36  
And where does that go? That ends up playing itself out?

Jordan 1:03:40  
Well, yes, absolutely. It's terminal. It's a big t terminal, meaning that it leads civilization to some sort of hard collapse and reboot. But just like a drug addict, just use that as a metaphor. You hit rock bottom, you either die or you have a moment of clarity and, you know, start moving in the direction. That's, that's where it goes. In our case, With a drug addict. It's quite challenging because the tools that we use to make sense of what's happening are the tools that are in fact addicting us. So figuring out what's going on is particularly challenging when the things you use to figure out what's going on are the things that's going on. And so, this is why reboot. liminality unplug is kind of the first step. And I mean, unplug not just from like Facebook, I mean, unplug from thinking in the way that you currently think at all.
Like reboot the whole thing, all the way down to just kind of sitting around staring blankly and then very slowly, spinning the soccer metaphors perfect. you've ever had your computer system really seriously jacked by hackers. You have to put things back very carefully. Critical if you actually have to put it back right, you can't just burn to the ground and get a whole new system. It's not quite clear whether you have malware in a particular sub component. So you just have to be very careful to take things step back by back now, we actually have a really nice opportunity. So we have a necessity to go through this reboot process. Because the afra mentioned hacking of our limbic systems and the core evolutionary game theoretic dynamic, that means that the hacking is not going to stop on its own. The pusher addict is a dynamic that doesn't have its own, like the pusher is never going to be in position because as soon as they give up, there's another pressure, right. So that's, that's got its own logic to it.
So we've got that we have a necessity in the sense, we have to get off that train. But then we have an opportunity, which is because the whole fucking world is shifting from one fundamental way of going about doing collective intelligence to another. It turns out the entire structure that has been hacked is obsolete anyhow. So we can move to the new and the new one is what the very least is different. So a lot of the old hacks aren't going to work in this in this new domain. So if you allow yourself to really free your mind and settle into a very bottom of the EU, which, for example, Buddhist meditation gets you into that level of just emptiness. And then from that place begin to re create some new way of making sense in yourself, and then making sense to gather with other people. You had the advantage that you are also almost completely immune to most of the techniques that come from this previous location. It has a sort of a downside, which you can't watch TV anymore, but I guess that's where it is.

Int 1:06:30
But there's no point in watching it anyway. If it's all getting played out and in ever decreasing loops.

Jordan 1:06:40  
Yeah, it's true. I mean, it's sad. It's kind of like, what happened to Captain America, but it is.

Int 1:06:46  
Cool. Jordan. Thank you. Yeah.