Jordan 0:02  
I was talking to Zach Stein, just a few moments ago, about this call. And I mentioned that I felt a certain sense of butterflies in my stomach. And as I was feeling the quality of the message. Oh yes, this is the feeling that I had and still have before I'm engaging in an athletic endeavor. The butterflies in the stomach, a sense of anticipation, but nervous. Well, you guys get it.

John 0:32  
Yeah, not trepidation but energizing anticipation, is that what you're describing?

Chris 0:41  
I get that too. I was thinking about that, too, before the call. Actually it's interesting to hear you say that because I had a similar feeling. And you're right, it's not trepidatious but it is anticipatory, and it has something to do with the fact that the conversations have already shown that they, because they have the transmuting quality such that at the end of it, we cannot have anticipated where will land at the beginning. And so there's something about that. There's something about that that provokes the anticipation because I don't know if I'm going to be on the other end of this call on the other side of it, and that has something to do with the anticipation.

John 1:23  
Yeah, there's something deeply aspirational about these conversations and essentially describe Chris if we were Agnes colored since we don't know who we're going to be and what values and perspectives we might come to inhabit from where we are right now. We can't foresee them in an influential manner, which is one of the sacred elements of this practice. 

Jordan 1:45
So the aspirational component that is momentous, that it's a momentous occasion because it implies both there's something will result and that result has potency, it has consequence. And meant to move through. It also implies skillfulness the butterflies perhaps energy coming up, saying, get your shit in gear, this is for real, this is going to happen. It's the more you're able to bring yourself to bear and push yourself and the others to the limit, the more change actually occurs. 

Guy 2:25
So what's really compelling about the way we're talking about it I'm noticing is: yes, I have this anticipation and these butterflies that come up in the face of the future. It's precisely because I don't know what to anticipate. That gives the character of anticipation. I wonder if we can think about the sense of the future as a call. 

John 3:05
I don't think it's just the butterflies, the great feats we're considering undertaking here. There's a not-knowing. I'm sensing that there's something that enables my commitment to the process, I've developed also a sense of trust, which is not the same as knowing I'm trusting in the process. Chris and I were talking about this last night, because we're working on this chapter about dialectic. I'm reading a book by Milan and he's talking about the Plato views dialogue. It's this process of trying to get out what is I would call the grammar of discipline discourse? What do we need? And one of the things we need is to move which is fundamental to rationality, an ability to trust in the process without having a pre determined prejudicial commitment to the product standard, which talks about this as being a crucial component of rationality. 
And I know when although we're not entering into an argument towards a conclusion, we're doing an inactive kind of rationality because we are training each other in the ability to trust in the process. And I'm interested in what affords that trust, what is it about what we're doing that makes us trusted? And this goes back to the issue that the conversation we had before about our vulnerability and is there some way in which the world is vulnerable or being as vulnerable to like, is there is there is there something that engender that trust in this process, the process is certainly has a vulnerability to it. That's one thing I've been thinking about. We have to care for the process of the vulnerable. And so there's a mutual there's a mutual relationship between my disclosing my vulnerability and the process is disclosing Its vulnerability. I don't know about the world yet, but at least I know that about the process. And to me that's engendering a love and a trust. For me, they're not the butterflies of trepidation. They're like when Bilbo climbs above the trees and mirkwood, and he sees the butterflies take flight, and they give him a trust in the journey that he's undertaken. Because they give him a moment of love. They give him a moment of realization. And so I'm very interested in about how these two come together.

Guy 5:38  
To bring in a thread that we've been talking about and we talked about in the last conversation, when you speak of with divine double. One of the interesting things about the divine double is that it precisely isn't what you are yet. Yet it's granting the normativity in which you are. And I'm wondering about I'm wondering about that. Is it that sense of what's beyond the horizon. A normativity that we're having, that makes it a sense of makes it worth being vulnerable for, engendering that sense of vulnerability as distinct from something like exposure. There's a willingness to sacrifice, something known or comfortable, because something's worth it. And that into what just beyond the horizon and it feels, to me very much what distinguishes the cadence of our conversation, and perhaps what calls us together is that we're constantly looking towards what it is that's emerging in the conversation. So it's not just like we know something and we record it. It's more we're engaging. And that what we end up talking about is something that isn't produced by us, but emerges and is calling to us in a way that we couldn't have known in advance. 

John 7:33  
All of that correct. I'll try and respond as quickly as possible, so other people can jump in. The engendering of trust is precisely one of the things that distinguishes vulnerability from exposure. And in a relationship like you said we have to the divine double that is coming the way in which we are being called beyond ourselves because we're trusting in the process. And what emerges from this term, the stand in for the divine double to which, towards which we are aspiring. It's the actually enacted symbol that joins this self, to the future self that's going to be beyond this conversation. I'm also interested in the fact that there's both this perspective looking forward, like we're describing, but there's also the retrospective, we keep circling back retrospectively and trying to get at what's grounding this. So we're prospecting towards the emergence but we're also retrospective towards the grounding what is grounding this that makes that kind of emergence possible, because you can really only ask about the ground when you see some of it promise fulfilled in the emergence, and you can only make sense of the emergence in terms of the intelligibility afforded by the ground. So there's both a prospective, and a retrospective move that's going on also within this.

Guy 9:20  
As that settles in, and I just get the whole of everything that you just said it, the implicit sense of vulnerability, the characteristic of vulnerability just makes when it occurs as a virtue of it. A necessary structural component of it.

John 9:46  
Exactly, exactly. So I'm trying to use the phenomenology and the functionality to articulate how we can understand vulnerability as one of the virtues that is necessary to the good practice of dialectic. That's what Chris and I are trying to work on right now.

Chris 10:05  
Terms of finding an ingress into the process itself, part of what makes these dialogues so commodious, and part of what spatialize is the divine double presence. There's a way in which that app dialogos specializes that presence and, between the participants, you open a space in which the presence actually emerges. And that insemination has a lot to do with the way that we treat our propositions in the course of the dialogue. So I've noticed that in both of Gaia and Jordan, both of you actually do this, just as a matter of course. And actually, it's a profound practice that you seem to do implicitl,y which is that you treat each proposition as a micro analogue for the relationship exemplified by the conversation, oh, this is great off. So, that whatever else we are discussing, we are discussing the relationship, imagine that the two hands mutually gripping the twin logo hands mutually gripping one another, every object that they take into hand is be holding them as it is beholden? Whatever we take into hand, we are also feeling we are feeling the hands that are gripping the object. And so there's a way in which each proposition is traded, contains within it that microcosmic presence of the whole relationship and there's an essence between them at the different levels. And if we treat every proposition as that micro analog for the relationship itself, then we realized that as we're treating propositions, we are treating the dynamic in a more difficult for almost holographic the way you're describing it.

Jordan 12:40
It was actually physically painful, but not in a bad way. Actually feel all the way the wholeness of what it was that you are invoking and expressing, and the carefulness with which you are binding the expression so it is able to actually be positional while holding the thing that it was referring to in a wholeness that had tightness to it. I was actually feeling like very specific body parts were actually being affected like my right leg started to hurt, and I had to move my physical body to come into some affordance conformance with what the hell was going on it was a very deep thing you were doing there because it has to do with thinking about the way this relationship of all, it's actually related to we were talking about earlier like, What the hell's even going on here? Like the internet and what's where where's this happening? In the very deep and profound sense there is the whole of all is expressing itself always already simultaneously in every expression. That's where it's happening. It is happening everywhere. The whole everything right now, my vocal cords are vibrating in my mouth, muscles are moving. And that is the universe is vocal cords vibrating, its mouth muscles are moving, as these words are, are expressing forth, and there's the milling, that bigness feeling the wholeness.

John 14:20  
So, Chris, this reminds me of Spinoza's kansien sativa but you're getting the whole in each part and the part to disclose relevance to the whole. So I'm trying to put these two together. Are you saying that the retrospective perspective thing moves towards something like scanty into TV, that's the way in which the divine double is presencing itself? And therefore engendering trust me I'm just trying to gather it together.

Chris 14:58  
There's that gathering motion of the logos is a bidirectional motion. And you were talking about that, how it really fits the process, but it also recasts its aspiration. So you said that beautifully just now, Jordan, that to hand all the one, and the idea that what's happening is that in every instance of that conversation, that process is reproducing itself. All along this analogic chain, it reminds me of one of Plato's dialogues, it's the ion he makes this analogy? This chain of analytic thinking going on here, he makes this analogy about the magnetic, the Heraklion stone, the magnetic stone that attracts a link of chains. And then as it attracts the link of chains, each of those change also activates its own magnetism and attracts more change? So there's this constant spousal in this, this this chain of connections. And eventually, I mean, even though it originates in the stone, there's some central dynamic, the dynamic speciate itself into each of the individual instantiations. The platonic idea. We were talking about the power last night, the power of the idose, its potency is such that is its reproductive in the participatory knowing? So the participatory knowing under two oceans, the I das and every single instance of it. Yes. So there's something like that going on. And a district. It's empowering, the word's so tainted now. But there's a cascade of empowerment that moves in both directions.

John 17:35  
Тhat sense of empowerment is the way which the world is calling me. It's not just speaking to me, it's moving me and I'm not just trying to make use that in a romantic emotive sense, I'm talking about restructuring my agency, affording my intelligibility to go forward and backward, gathering and gathering and resetting and refitted. Yes, that's key to Guy's notion of Harkening the forms of intelligibility that are emerging, empower us, they afford us, they enable us. And that's part of why I trust, if something is giving me power, and it's giving me a path to my truer self, I'm going to trust it. I'm going to trust it deeply, even if I don't know and I can't put into propositions, what it's going to what the steps are going to look like, or what the final product is going to look like. That's why I'm going to trust.

Guy 18:30
The trust being in the movement of connectivity, and impact living back and forth, not in something my dad always said to me would say, the more profound it is, he says, you can boil down all human suffering, right down to a point: man tries to put a period where God puts a question mark.

John 19:06  
Yeah, I'm not proposing any idolatrous power, Guy. I certainly don't want to bring a full stop to God. That's not in my job description anywhere, I hope.

Guy 19:23  
However, there's a fundamentalness that I'm hearing, it sounds like what we're talking about. I'm wondering if what we're circling around here a bit, we're addressing nihilism, is it referring a different relationship to proposition. And so far I'm finding the fundament in the ambiguity in the ever evolving effectiveness. But there's not a thing, a period that I can find that I can just stake a claim on, but rather maybe the sense of proposition and this is this harkens back to a conversation you and I were having a few months ago, John, where we were talking about, well, maybe what the measure of the proposition is really, to the degree that it allows me to further question to further to further to further reveal the mystery as a mystery. Hmm, you linked it to a sense of pragmatism or truer sense of pragmatism that James was actually talking about this very distinct from the pragmatic, pragmatic, and the pragmatism that's known. 

John 21:10
I see there's a danger of the word ambiguity because MDD can be a ground for equivocation. It can be a ground for vagueness, it can be a ground for bullshit, it can be a ground for deception and misdirection. And I don't think Plato was trying to bring about a resolution. I mean, he's very much about pursuing understanding rather than pursuing knowledge. I agree with bowline on that, so not trying to bring the full stop. But what we're trying to do here, and this is what the magic of it, what the practice has been for us is we're trying to bring clarity, and clarification is not the same thing as completeness. There's almost a million things? You can't have them both. And part of what the vulnerability is we give up on the completing, but we nevertheless don't take that as any excuse for not pursuing the clarification. And that's what I'm trying to articulate.

Guy 22:20  
I didn't even know that there was something unclear until you clarified it.

Jordan 22:32  
So there's something about what I was feeling, the word that came up from it was life, and life is living on the razor's edge, always balancing a forward movement between the actualized and the potential and the possum. And so every move this movement of clarification, because we just had it. You had expressed in a way that generated clarity clarification with that clarification was signed. taneous Lee, a realization actualization a concretization of something it made something makes sense in a deeper way and an opening. And that is what avoids this, this thing that you were concerned about is that movie and movement is one that increases possibility and increases actuality.

Chris 23:27  
Yeah. So what's taking shape here is the clarification as opposed to the completeness, that was good differentiation. John, the clarification certainly in the Socratic spirit takes the form of inquiry. And it makes me think that part of what we are doing part of the spatialized project, that logic spatialize and project that we've been talking about is afforded by a, if I can retrofit your anecdote a little bit guy about your, your father's little Maxim there, I'll tell us what we're really doing is replacing the period with the question mark, as a way of opening the space back up, but in a way that the aspiring breath opens the lung full of space, what we're doing bye. That's the redress that we are aspiring to. We're trying to obviate the the propositional tyranny that happens when the assumption of completeness starts to strangle conversation. Part of the engendering of spousal of trust, that we're talking about has to do with the authentication. of the process of inquiry, as opposed to the process of assertion. And so as that metaphoric replacement of the period with the question mark is a spatialize and gesture that opens up that room-like affordance 444, more intelligibility to them, then to them laps into the conversation, and then to take shape turns. A significant formal change. Certainly in the Socratic tradition, the formulation of the replacement of assertion with inquiry is a formal way of shifting the mode of conversation such that it becomes trusting, such that it becomes progressive.

John 25:58  
I want to add to that, because that shifts us off of the drive towards conclusion and instead, the drive towards appreciation and allegiance. This is what you see in the Socratic dialogue, people come to appreciate more and more self knowledge and the knowledge of being, without having arrived at conclusions about self knowledge and being, and then they have an allegiance to a process that discloses and trains them in that appreciation. I'm using appreciation like when what you do at music appreciation class, because this is how you properly aspire, you engage in the process of appreciation, which has both the gratitude that guy keeps reminding us about, but it also has the understanding the changing of relevance and salient that Plato is emphasizing.

Jordan 26:55
You can play with the other meaning of the term as well, which is increase in value. 

John 27:05
Thank you, Jordan. Yes, that triple play on that word is excellent. I'm glad we're recording this, Chris. Oh my gosh, this is so valuable. Every time, thoughts, ideas come out collectively that I can't see, I know in my bones, I couldn't come up with them on my own.

Chris 27:32  
Because the quaternity here creates a different team spirit. It's a different entity unto itself entirely than the one that possesses any smaller combination of any of us, I would imagine. 

Jordan 27:50
So I'm returning into happening to our previous conversations is the implication of the presencing of the novel medium. We now live in an era where it is possible for us to be having this conversation in a fashion that can be recorded for our own consumption and for more broad share. That has implications nificant implication, here is this Socratic dialogues were not recorded, they were remembered, and then they were written down, which is the thing, and then our conversations that are ephemeral may not even be remembered particularly. So there's something about the fact that the possibility of this kind is very important. This is a new possibility. 

John 28:40
It picks up on two things, but transcends them both and how picks up on both of them Jordan, it picks up on Guy's point. He's constantly reminding us us that every conversation is impregnated with the other conversations. I always get this indra's net image and it's powerful, but it also picks up as you said, on when Plato did something formative to Socrates when he turned them into written dialogues, so that there's a meta dialogical relation? There's a relationship between the dialogues, but we got both of those, but they're not taken up. And there's something new? There's the remembering, and there's Plato's inter dialogic relation. But that's now taken and made something even more, by what this new medium is affording us.

Guy 29:30  
Also, what's really interesting is because I listened to our last dialogue with my wife, in the car on the way up to our honeymoon, and it was our, a lot of what I was listening to was how she was hearing it. She's married to me, so she's open to hearing this stuff. She's so happy I have friends. Like I probably won't be woken up in the middle of the night having to listen to this stuff, but one of the things that was really interesting is that she actually implicitly could not be be part of the dialogue, we had to stop it at so many times and she said, Oh my god, and the other thing that was striking about it is she kept being moved by how much authority was built between us. If that was such a collaborative part, I was experiencing the same thing as I was listening to it, and I'd heard lots of comments about it. Yeah, also interesting about YouTube where people are just really moved into an extended affinity that is evoked through this. And so in terms of media, it does feel like we're able to share something that people can find themselves emotionally impacted by, and share with us in a way that has them spontaneously join the dialogue, even though it's not the interlocuters aren't present in a spatial temporal sense. 

Jordan 31:45
So the transform looks like a record, a loop. But the transforms is the key thing, which is to say that particular spatial temporal correspondence, our attention and intention into something that is recorded is not the thing. The thing is the oceanic capacity that is beginning to emerge of which this is both a reserved representation and apart. So to the degree to which your wife has a conversation that is akin to have the same spirit of this conversation. She cannot help but be embodying some portion of what it was she was inviting in that conversation. The fabric is whole, it is not part. 

John 32:40
So I wonder if that's a design feature of this, Jordan? Should it be that this practice is always practiced under the normativity given this new medium, that we should be marketing for participation? It's carried out in such a way that those who listen are, they're called into participation with it, is that an implication of what you're saying? 

Jordan 33:08  
Absolutely. In fact, it's omnipresent, always there, and then for that actualization, that increases the possibility in a very specific sense. 

Guy 33:20
And it speaks to the last conversation about that which engenders a certain faith? In that one finds oneself already in the conversation. It's not a stepping back in agreeing with you actually find yourself already going, oh, I've been thinking, I didn't even realize I have been concerned about this. 
John 34:00
That is the deep participatory element, the connect. Because that's the knowing that comes from identifying with something inside of yourself, as opposed to just asserting a proposition, applying a skill, or adopting a perspective, when you say I've already been people comment that way all the time, on these dialogues, I was already thinking along those lines, there's an identification something in them identifies it, they participate in the conversation because it calls forth but that means there has to be, I don't know a sensibility of the of the participants in these dialogues like Jordan saying, we have a sensibility to this directed towards the fact that we have to be speaking, we have to be speaking to the potential of calling forth from people like there's a midwifery, like Socrates said and what we're doing, we have to we, we have to touch people, so they feel that they are conceiving, they're both they're both to give birth, which is a participatory metaphor. I keep circling back. I'm trying to get at, what are the design features? What's the normativity? How is it working? So I'm going to keep  redirecting things this way. I hope you guys don't find it too imposing, because I'm trying to. Well, like I said, I'm trying to clarify for appreciation. That's what I'm trying to do.

Guy 35:20  
Well, one of the things that really struck me in a conversation, Chris, that you had, that is very telling of what we're talking about right now. I was struck by what the was with the interview or conversation that you had with Sevilla. And it really struck me as you said something. It's funny, these conversations we've been having, I'm finding myself not remembering exactly how you put it, but something on the world of finding myself seeing my identity legitimately as a philosopher. From the conversation, I didn't get the sense that you were like, "I'm not a philosopher. Until now that I've had conversations, this officially makes me a philosopher." I'm finding myself just implicitly experiencing myself as a legitimate philosopher. In a certain sense, I was really struck by that, I'm in the realization of the Divine double. 

John 36:42  
That's the realization of the Divine double when you are so giving birth to yourself. That's the realization of the Divine double, I would say God.

Guy 36:54  
Yeah, interesting, is it may speak but through the dialogue? Yes, through the process of something that we're forever outdoing our propositions or birthing out of our propositions. The new propositions that lead to these kinds of things, that there's also something that in implicitly has to do with finding identity in a participatory way with each other. That really stood out for me in the conversation and I thought that was hermetically revealing. I think very highly of you, Chris.

Chris 37:45
Oh, thank you.

John 37:49  
As you should, Guy.

Chris 37:53  
It's interesting, that just erupted in a moment, I don't think that had occurred to me in advance of in advance of that realization in that moment. But you're exactly right, it has something to do with partaking of the identity of the dialogos. And it has something to do with Harkening myself in the throes of that identity, overhearing myself as it were, and what I overheard, could be termed a philosopher. So there's still a sense of dissociation in that the identity belongs to the process. It belongs not to me, it belongs to my partaking of the religion. And it is only true in the context in the motion and gesture of that relation. So when I enter into the forum with you all there's a sense in which I feel I am possessed of the identity. And now the possession of that identity lingers beyond the conversation because what use would the conversation be if it did not linger after the fact. If we didn't interject it and it didn't live on within us, but it is something I hear and not speak. It is bespoken, but I don't find myself speaking it. I find myself overhearing and it's funny, and it brings something to mind when you talked about the experience of sitting in your car with your wife, and listening to our dialogue through your wife. That's a little instance of a phenomenon that happens constantly, which I find really interesting, which is an example of what we're talking about. 
When you sit down and you watch something, maybe it's like on TV or a film or something like that, and you have a certain impression of it, it has a certain impact on you and then you sit down with in company with not just any company but you sit down with food like close familiars intimates. And that the second time you watch whatever it is you're watching, you're not you're you're listening and watching through the ears of the relationship, a spouse, by the company or in, you're not, you're not listening as an individual, you're listening with the ear of the group. And so when people when individuals are affiliated by this, by this, this, this, this distributed conversation of which they partake, and they're internalizing the conversation and then participatory knowing it, what's also happening is that they become they start knowing through the dynamic and so they listen through it, they hear through it, and their understanding is understood through it. So now when I look Tarik, when I'm becoming interrogative within a given subject matter, there's a sense now in which I'm listening to it through the era of perhaps the four of us or perhaps other combinations of intimate dialogic partners. Because it becomes like an epidemic apparatus, like a prosthesis that's now fixed around you, through which you speak. And there's that relationship. It's a transparency shift. It's an indwelling. But as you and I discussed, John, what happens is that it settles like the transparency and opacity, the crossfading of the transparency opacities results into a translucency. So the translucency in that cognitive phenomena is the symbolic phenomenologist phenomenology the symbols are translucent phenomenology because we see through and we know nobody.

John 42:04  
So let's put it back on, to the people because there is a sense, we're both seeing the people in the dialogue but we're also seeing through the people. So there's a trend. We're seeing through them, and the way you're describing, but we're also seeing them and appreciating them and hearing them. So there's a translucency and that's how they're becoming symbolic to us, iconic in the religious sense?

Chris 42:29  
We're really good. There's a phenomenological continuity between us and the beholdin persons. That symbolic continuity is then the entity that is perceiving. That's why you and I, John, have talked about the relationship being a meta-analogic entity, a symbol that's a knowing vessel, in addition to being inwardly an interpsychically knowing.

John 43:00  
This then so when you were when you're over here and listen to the word "over", when you're overhearing yourself as a philosopher, are you "overhearing" through that group, that group being that you're describing? Are you basically overhearing through the dynamic of dialogic process?

Chris 43:20
Exactly, which also makes it authenticated, which also means plausible, It also means that it's more plausible because it has a convergence of noos. 

John 43:35
Also the two things are going to stereoscopically fuse, my trust in the process and my trust in the people are going to mutually afford and reinforce each other. Because they have to be the familiar intimates for you. You're looking through them.  And then what happens is the trust in the relation also espouses trust in its participants. 

Guy 44:35
In understanding what is just transpired I find my understanding, unbuttoned and revealed, like what it took what it took for me to understand what you were saying was what was understanding as it was happening and there was a sense of nakedness at the end. It but like a nakedness then out LIKE YOU ON button my gaze all the way down and it stood out and when I like this, it's intense? This revealing sense of it.

Jordan 45:16  
Which is evocative of the hermetic Eros what you just described? And it's aspirational quality, mercy. 

Jordan 45:50
Okay, so check this out, vulnerability. So we're talking about now how to play how to be participatory in this collaborative Coming together into a group where relationality that has an embodied capacity to be participatory in and of itself and to participate in that, and to receive and to give and to receive and to give. So vulnerability now becomes the entry point into receptivity and sensitivity and reception. And then also notice the other side of that in the capacity and the sense of carefulness, so that the sensitivity in the receptivity of the others are well met, you were not getting, you're actually giving something that is opening up and allowing that receptivity to find itself to become more capable becoming it's more nuanced and subtle sensing capacity so that it can even grow more deeply and richer, and its ability to give more to what is happening and transpiring in the conspiracy to inspire, so there's something along the lines, deepening and you're reaching that feeling of that begins with the invocation of vulnerability. To me it feels like becoming very fluid. You become almost polymorphic, yourself has to actually unfold and unfurl and the way that you've balanced like vision, insight, you become synesthetic and more portions of yourself like unfurl into this new thing because you have to flow into a shape that is not your shape, you have to be sensitive to the shape that you are Is this your particular shape that is conforming to the possibility of what is available in this particular container. And as you become more and more there, it becomes more and more real and more and more alive and then that overhearing becomes more clear.

John 47:50  
That's a very powerful and enriching description of what Murdoch calls sensability transcendence, where what you're doing is exactly everything you just described, Jordan. The willingness to reshape yourself, so that you fit to the person, so that they can afford their reshaping themselves. And that's happening in this, in a continual, bidirectional manner. And it's an integral dimension of what's going on. And in the dialectic practice.

John 48:57  
Oh, I'm wondering if it's okay, if we could pick up on a thread that Guy introduced and we went on to do a lot of good retrospection, we were doing a lot of what's the grounding? And how is it affording the intelligibility. But I want to come back to the something that guy said that struck me prospectively, which also taps on another dimension of the vulnerability and trust, which is the confrontation with nihilism. You mentioned that guy, you explicitly named it as that and we and part of our responsibility, as Jordan so well articulated to the people who might be listening. To speak, so that they can find Harkening, and what we're saying is, to realize that many people are coming to these dialogues precisely because of the meaning crisis or the confrontation with nihilism and experience of disconnection, absurdity, etc. And I'm requesting could we back around to that theme. Let's try and bring it out in dialogue the way Chris aptly described, create the overseer, through which we can see and hear ourselves. But what is it about this practice that can be responsive? We're not looking for a conclusive argument against nihilism, because that's probably not doable for reasons I've articulated elsewhere. But how is this a response? And I'm using my words very carefully. And I want to pick up on the three meanings that Jordan assigned to this word that make that a response that people can appreciate. A response to nihilism that people can appreciate. I'd like to ask the dialogos that we have engendered between us.

Guy 51:06  
One of the things that strikes me is an underpinning or an undercurrent of this conversation is, at one level, we're talking about this dialogue and dialogue and the development of this and we're asking yourself, what is what is this thing that's participating in will calls it into participation? Like what moves towards it, what moves away from it all? And there's also a way that we can we can we can look at the dialogue as a way of being situated in life. Your world, they think that's why when you said in the in the last dialogue when you said that, that you toward it with or that question of God, Chris, is does this mean that what you're saying that the world is vulnerable? That's that was that seemed to be like summarizing culminating opening point in that dialogue. We're like blown away. And I'm wondering about, if that question actually points to a response to nihilism. Because if we can experience in some way, the world being an animate responsiveness and a vulnerability, then I don't like them, then I can have the experience of living meaning. That is the thing that people are really wanting and what is missing, in people's daily lives, this sense of that? That they don't when they look out at the shopping mall and the different the world doesn't have any sense to it? They can experience they don't feel it. I'm wondering if that's really good.

John 53:07  
Just to make sure I've understood, so people are drawn to this process to do dialogos, the dialectic that engenders the dialogos, because they see an exemplification of an aspect of being that espouses vulnerability and receptivity. And that allows for that connectedness, touchingness, contact intimacy with the world that people are hungering for in the meaning crisis. 

Guy 53:51  
My understanding of part of nihilism is so intricately likw, the scientific horizon as people prereflectively look at it and sees it as not something that's vulnerable or responsive or feels us, but that it's inert matter that we can act upon, and it'll go off, with or without us, and that's a lot worse. So I mean, nihilism is really complicated. There may be claims about it, but it's inherent in what draws us to converse. And there's a way in which this can be seen as a symbol, or a way that's possible to relate with the universe, per se. In a living way.

John 55:00
It's an exemplification and an instantiation of being and the response to the meaning crisis is always going to be a way of being as opposed to a proposition, a set of propositions.

Chris 55:21  
So you connecting these two things together, the idea of the world's vulnerability and nihilism is like what an insight that is. Because one possible formulation of the problem of nihilism is that the body of the world is barren. Inaccessible to us, closed, no longer suggestible and impressionable, and that means that there it is not fertilizeable. And so one of the projects, any response to the meaning crisis has to find a way to refer to allies the world. And then even in all of your language, there's this embodied vernacular of Eros emerging. And so then the vulnerability and the phenomenological, suggestibility, and the process of symbolizing the world is something approximating this dialogic project like that what we're aiming to do is what we're aiming to do is mutually be fertilized with the world. Because if the problem if one of the problems of nihilism is that we are disinterested in the world, we're disinterested because it doesn't seem to avail potential within itself. It's opaque to us. Going back to the transparency opacity. Issue, the world has an opacity, it's just perennially obfuscated, barred from entry. And so then, the symbolizing nature of the dialogic project is that we're trying to gain access to a phenomenological texture in behind that opaque edifice, that is otherwise, none of our more naturalistic probative implements can gain us access to something that requires a symbolic process like ideal logos. So going back to your question, John, about what can this offer to?
If not an inoculation against nihilism, then at least a countervail. The pathology and nihilism is to become interested in the world again, we have to trust in the potential of the world of the world, transforming as a consequence of our practice. So we were talking in the beginning of this conversation we were talking about, we were talking about the butterflies and how part of the butterflies the butterflies have to do with the fact that the world that we're entering into his phenomenologically altered from the world that we subsisted in prior to entering into the conversation. So one way of regaining interest in the world is a trust in the potential that the world can in fact transformed to our touch. And that the dialogic process offers, because it exemplifies it offers such a trust, and the transformative process becomes a trust in the potential for the world to be phenomenologically retexture. And that is the trust and that is that amounts to perhaps a capacity to become really interested in it. 

John 58:48  
To be within, and dwelling. There's a deep analogue in the symbolic sense? Between dialogue that we can have between people and the anagoge we can have with the world. Because in the anagoge, we can get that reciprocal opening that engender is love, we get a sense of the responsiveness of the world. Because as I shaped myself. The biological analogy of nice construction. The animal is shaping the environment, which is shaping the animal, what's shaping the environment, and there's in the idea of niche construction and biology and anagoge in Plato, you get that coupled responsiveness? That you get a sense of that. You have to be really careful about your language here because it can be misunderstood, but there's a sense in which is closing itself to you. The world is self transcending, as well as your self transcending, there's a huge opening of you in the world. And so there's that lightness and responsiveness. There's a deep affinity analogy between the sensibility transcendence between people, and then the anagoge between people in the world that's already being afforded this practice. And so if people engage in and this is what you see in the platonic tradition, if they engage in the interpersonal practice, the sensability transcendence, they also they also were practicing the analog, ontologically. And the two were seen as completely interpenetrating and inter affording each other. 

Chris 1:00:44  
The two thous merge right now. That was the social thou opposite us and the thou of the ontological mystery of the world converge in the symbol. 

Guy 1:01:04  
There's a part where something that struck me the last conversation we talked about this, is there's a horizon that you were responsive to, John. Which by the way, I always appreciate your horizons that you respond to.

John 1:01:25  
One of the things I've never been complimented that way ever before. I'm also glad that I have friends, Guy, thank you.

Guy 1:01:35  
Compliments about Jordan and Guy's propositional sense. You got really had a response or an exuberation, in the idea of that the world could be thou without having to personify it. That's exactly what I've been thinking about, since it's within this excitement. I want to be unconceal what's important about that, because something's important about that.

John 1:02:07  
Yeah. And you're impregnating this conversation with some wonderful conversations I've been having with Paul Vanderclay and especially with JP Marceau and Mary Cohen. We just did this, we just released it yesterday, a three way discussion between us because I was talking about the contrast between theism, non theism, and what you just said was something that I was groping towards in that conversation. I want to get to a position where I can address the world as a thou, without personifying it. And this is the gold that needs to be mined out of nontheism, so that we can get to a place where we deeply thou-ing the world, but there is no person here. And that's how nontheism could be understood to be representing sacredness. And so that is something that because there's a concern. Not that we should drop this thread because this thread is wonderful, this is golden fleece thread. But as we start talking about the dao, as Chris is appropriately doing, and we start talking about the responsibility of the world, there's a tendency to move towards an ontotheological theism. And then Heidegger and Wittgenstein, and all of the people that have helped me so much come up in my mind and say, What are you doing? Don't go back into ontotheology. That's how we got into nihilism in the first place. So that's the horizon that's behind me. And I'm literally participating in recent conversations about what you just so astutely put your finger on, how can we thou without there being a metaphysical person that we are addressing?

John 1:03:57  
Yeah, how do we avoid creating images? I take very deeply Heidegger's critique of ontotheology as being a fundamental grammar for nihilism. And part of the deal, Jordan, is to not go back into the grammar that gets us into nihilism, if we try to disclose the phenomenology of what's happening in dialectic and dialogos, and it leads us back into ontotheology, I want to step out of it. We've lost the game in my mind.

Jordan 1:04:30
You raised something earlier that reminded me of something that hasn't been part of this conversation, but it connects to the meaning crisis from the other direction, the direction that I spend most of my time in. So nice construction. One of the risks of niche construction is that the organism is quite good at niche construction. And so it has become hyper fragile. It's able to control the changing of its context. So that itself can fit to its context to a very high level. But when reality finally breaks that control and the context changes, the organism is now hyperfragile. 

John 1:05:20
Jordan, that's exactly Heidegger's critique of ontotheology. It's comprehensive niche construction that became indispensable. And then when reality moved beyond it, for all of its monolithic momentum, it revealed itself as hyper fragile, and that's Heidegger's argument for the emergence of nihilism. 

Jordan 1:05:45
So we humans are moving now very quickly into a phase where our capacity for niche construction must achieve an enduring escape from that trap. We are now fully responsible for the world in which we live. If we drop the ball, if we get captured by this construct that will shatter in this way, then we bring the whole of the world with us at the biological level. So, our meaning crisis is both sides of the word meaning and it's both the sense and feeling of meaning that we have. And it isn't fact that the means the actual words. Well, Linda writes both simultaneously, and both must be resolved and both can be resolved, which creates the gift for that's the thing that everybody's been talking about is in the inquiry into this question now for 10,000 years is that when we are able to achieve a level of skillfulness and navigating this inquiry, the inquiry that we're entering into this question of game Bay, we then also achieved the level of skillfulness to be responsible for niche construction in a way that is enduring, we take responsibility for the world that takes your spot, stability for us. And we are no longer on the path of potentially running off round into extinction that has always faced up. I always test every organism. We're in a different game.

John 1:07:12  
This is exactly the problem we're trying to address with it with that. The way you just do everything together, that was brilliant. The issue I had with ontotheology was is it those the world's so much that the vulnerability of the world is lost. And it becomes, this freezing, just locking down. And that's the basis of Heidegger's critique, because once we get the world once we get our ontology frozen by onto theology, and though the world, as it always will, reality goes beyond that, we lose touch with the world nihilism because our touch is frozen it has been numbed by that framework.

Guy 1:08:07  
The question I have, the thing that caught my attention was, what if our niches become so context overfittws, such that the reality when reality shifts, it becomes highly brittle. In its overfitness, what is it related to, if it's not related to the reality? I'm wondering if that's inherently a little bit what we're talking about is if there's the reality that can overflow it and it become brittle. 

John 1:09:10
In the original metaphor that Jordan invokes, it's actually a particular environment and the world has multiple environments. And so you could extend that analogy. The world has multiple aspects that are relevant realization machinery can couple to, we asked actualize the world but if we lose the translucency of our aspects reality, and it becomes an opaque veneer that is now stuck to the world and hardens the world. And then ultimately, when if the world slips away behind it, we've lost touch with the world because now we're just touching this surface that we've made. So I'm trying to build on Jordan's analogy, here's a jungle environment, but the problem is the African rift opens up and it becomes Savannah. And now you're screwed. Because you've overfitted to a jungle, and the world has moved on and introduced this new environment? And so if you set up this particular metaphysics, what Heidegger called off the theology? You it fitted you to a particular way in which reality can be asked to actualize. But reality is going to move on, it's going to move on, and then you're going to lose touch. That's how I'm trying to understand it. Did that help?

Jordan 1:10:31  
The thing is the past, which is to say that the past embodies itself in that period that your father warned you about. It's that which has been endeavoring to make that is, and shall be, nothing more than what it was.

Guy 1:10:54  
So actually I'm thinking about this translucency. So something becomes fitted, and then becomes over fitted. It becomes opaque to the reality. So there's not a translucency that keeps it in relationship, updating, making it flexible. It sounds like what happens in intimacy. It's a harkening. A good way of looking and highlighting what may be happening in these dialogues that make them shine forth in the way that they write, is this distinction between idle talk and authentic speech, idle talk has that quality of, I'm saying what I'm saying, so as to keep something in existence that was right. The interpretations of the culture characters thread through all of our thoughts.

John 1:12:07  
It's inertial. And it's idle in both senses, too. I just want to pick up on that motion that you were doing, Guy, because the gesture was important, that not only do you lose touch with the world, when you become numb, but you lose touch with yourself. It's a bidirectional numbing that's happening. That's what nihilism is, the numbing of the world interjected as a numbing to oneself. That's when it really bites us. And that's why the invocation of intimacy is exactly the right thing to say there.

Guy 1:12:41  
This is where it starts. I want to just bring in some parallels to some other things that we've been talking about too, but I've been circling, which in many ways just highlights and puts control. This particular thing that happens in relationship, and as has been pointed out that even though it's explicitly a secular practice, yes. 

John 1:13:10
Talking about it using all of these terms in religious language. That brings back the thing. And we've done some good stuff around it but I still find it pressing on me. How do we thou the world without personify it? We've talked about want to personify, but how do we value it? How do we get the intimacy genuine, I vow intimacy without bringing back all of the risks of the until theology that over fitted us in a particular way to our historicity. It saw that as as a cosmic cosmic teleology, so we over fit into our historicity in a particular way. Now, we're in a new stage of history in a fundamental way, and it no longer fits. How do we read out without bringing all of that game A back with fit? Bring it all that old code back that really brought people to the precipice of nihilism.

Jordan 1:14:19  
Mindful of, in my own life, the recurrence of the simplicity and very simple practicality that seems to be the grounding. So you said it's a way of being. It's not a story, an ideology, a theology, or those kinds of things. There's a way of being, and what's coming up for me was the conversation I had was having yesterday. It has to do with a habit that I have, my wife has, and most people have, which is a rapid tendency to disassociate under certain conditions, mostly interrelationally. And so particular events show up in relationships, in this case with a spouse. And because of the way that we have been people in the world, our way of being in the world, the reactive defense mechanism to what's coming up is dissociation, which is numbness in both directions. And that is the ground. That's a way of being is that if you spend X amount of your life in disassociation, you're going to have a very hard time having the feeling of connectedness, that is the necessity of a way of being on the other side of a meeting crisis. 
So for me most of the time, the present stuff is ready at hand is to actually do the work of actually in yourself, building a capacity to respond to exactly what is happening in the world, dialogically what is happening in the relationships that are most present. And when you have learned when you become conscious, that event of how that happens. So the first movement is just simply to build a new habit to have once or twice had an encounter where your way of responding to an event that otherwise would have moved into numbness doesn't, then the next move is to then become conscious of that you can become aware of that, as a thing. This then becomes the hand? This is the you can now begin the crawling up on your own up up into a deeper capacity to be in a meaningful relationship with the diversity of experiences that life is throwing at you. And because you've had it first person in yourself, may in fact be very important relationship with your spouse or with your child or something like that. It's not esoteric, it's not theology. It's not hand wavy, it's not fancy. It's the most possible meal there can be.

John 1:16:48  
And that brings you right back to Socrates, pursuit of virtue, because that's exactly how Socrates, training those habits that you just mentioned. That's why the dialogues always circle around a virtue because ultimately it comes down to a virtuous way of being. That's what exactly what's being trained in the dialogue, as opposed to a particular conclusion to an argument. That's why the dialogue will often end in a propositional aporia. But people want to spend more time with Socrates. That's how a couple of the dialogues in the interlocutors who know agreement about courage or friendship hasn't been arrived. But the interlocutor say, I want my son's to come and spend more time with you, Socrates, because the dialogue itself is training the habit, it's training, the virtue, that you're talking about the ability to be the virtue of receptive responsiveness, the virtues of SenseAbility transcendence, and Anna Gaga. Yes. And what is precisely important about a virtue is it's a way of being that inseminate the very, most prosaic aspects of our life, your honest when you're honest with your partner, and there's a point of conflict about some issue. That's when honesty really tells courage.

Guy 1:18:11  
The Aristotle talks about the virtue of that which precedes them all or come fro courage. But also this thing with intimacy. So in family systems theory, they have a really interesting way of talking about intimacy, where they say intimacy is a function, but it's in virtue of your ability. Like how you become intimate is directly proportional to your ability to tolerate anxiety. You get to this core existential, like paradoxical drives that we have as human beings? On one level, I want to merge with the environment. I want belonging, but only forever and guaranteed right on every sense of my being at the same time I want to stand out in my cosmic. Intimacy usually has this element of risk. When all of a sudden, I don't like your cooking. That's truth? But if I say that, I'm afraid I'm gonna upset you and you're going to divorce me. But if I don't say it, then I'm like not being honest about who I really am. And so there's this paradox, this tension. And if you don't have any ability to walk in that anxiety, and in one's like, say your truth and risk all of it? Then intimacy won't happen. And there's one of three ways that you move away from anxiety? There's one that you just addressed, which is dissociation. I hope you're enjoying dinner because I'm on the floor, I'm on the ceiling, like. The other one is to submit, which is, Oh, yeah, you're cooking, and it will do whatever you want to do and just not even not address it. I don't like it. So I disappear, I submit and the other way that they talk about is through dominating, where I'll just take control of this situation. I won't ask you what you're doing and I'll just boom, boom, and all of those waves are ways of moving away from anxiety. And then there are other other ones is like or you stay and you grow.

John 1:21:01  
That's the way of love. That's Tillocks point to look, the point is the continual the tonos, the tension between individuation and participation, and the courage to be is the ability to love. Love is the virtue of intimacy? Love isn't a feeling, it isn't an emotion. Aquinas was really good at saying, Well, no, love is a virtue. It's a disciplining of your ability to have the courage to be to find that anagoge, coupling between individuation and participation, so that you can fall in love with the situation because love is like it's a voluntary necessity. I bind myself from my freedom to a situation that's how it that's how it steers between both domination and submission. Because I'm voluntarily binding myself doing this entity. That's the Christian virtue. Love is the virtue of intimacy and the courage to be at cilix main argument in the courage to be that the courage to be and love in this sense Love is a virtue are deeply interdependent. You can't have one without the other. 

Jordan 1:22:08  
I found myself inquiring into the nature of this concept of courage. I was listening to friends of mine, we were having a conversation. I was just called to listen to it. And I ended up coining the term infinitesimal courage to make sense of the fact that, for example, the GI generation so my grandfather, you have you have somebody who has the courage to storm the beaches at Normandy, he has the courage to be in a hail of lead and having his friends just blown apart or the courage to fly bombers over the Himalayas, where 70% of the crews die. But doesn't have the courage to be intimate with his wife about her cooking. That's a big deal. That's very important, to recognize the distinction and the fact that is the infinitesimal courage that we are most called to. The thing that is not going to be valorized, the thing that is not going to get you a medal, the thing that in many ways is not even noticed as valuable, and yet is the very basis of all, real virtue. Getting a hold of that is very powerful.

Guy 1:23:20  
Why do I know to hear that as really important, like the infinitesimal courage? Well, what is the understanding that grants that and has that light up as important?

John 1:23:52  
Well, I'm going to say relevance realization. You had an insight that altered what you find, if you didn't get to so much new data. What is the difference between knowledge and understanding is to grasp the significance of what we know. And that's what understand and morally makes the argument that Plato's actually after understanding rather than knowledge, and what happens in an insight, your relevance realization machinery is altering this. It's altering what you find salient and relevant. So a new significance is now available to you that wasn't available before. But the thing about things like virtue is like and this is also made playing in the dialogues. And this is one of the reasons why they fall into a pouria you really can't know courage unless you have some courage. You really can't know there's a Minos paradox about virtue, unless you have some honesty, there's nothing I can appeal to in you, to get you to become to aspire towards honesty? So there's what I'm saying, Guy, there has to be something in you already. And then its significance has been disclosed to you and that's why you responded to it in the way you did, with that primordial agreement. That's what I would suggest.

Guy 1:25:07  
And that's the very thing. That is also highlighting the very locus in place. That what we're talking about is the vulnerability of the world in the eyes of the world is something to do with the narrowness of it. There's a way to where the world on one level is really out there. It's the most out there about there but it's also the thing that's so near, it conceals itself. There is an intimacy with the world. It seems to me, that we can lose track of the world. It's so close to us. It both determines us. There's an intimacy that I perhaps we can recognize and unconcealed. Maybe nihilism numbs us to that relation. That we can get in touch with what we are already. We are that, which is the antechinus of it. There's something there's something there. Yeah, I want to draw you out on this. I want to reduce from you more, because you said this before, I've always found it provocative. 

John 1:26:20
So, I get a sense of what Heidegger is talking about when he talks about the nearness, but you're doing the thing that isn't explicit in Heidegger, you're trying this connection to the vulnerability and also to the thouing. And I get a sense that there's something there. But so, maybe you want the rest of us to engage and help you with it. I want to draw that out more because there's something there. There's something about there's a hidden intimacy and the near illness that the speaks the that that the potential to vow the world and to disclose it as vulnerable. That's just a very clumsy sentence that try to draw it all together.

Guy 1:26:55  
Yes, I've noticed this for me and in our conversations is that the real deep relevance realizations have this quality of, it was already there. It's one of the things that makes it so potent. And also its connection to wonder. It's a big part of us. Back since making wormhole episode with this one guy, he described wonder in this amazing way that actually points to this. I've been thinking about ever since, like wonder is when you're in a room that you've been in your whole life, and then you lean back on the wall, and you realize there was a door there. And wonder is that experience of recognizing, there's an open door to a whole other world and that it was there the whole time. And that somehow it was concealed to you but it was there and that experience of where the ground opens up in that ground on some central's closer into your closer to yourself another another example of that is the movie, The sixth sense? Yeah, where you gonna kick it? Yeah that the whole time no one knows that the note and then right at the end out of the corner of his eye, he realizes and everyone else realizes, oh my God he's dead and then and then it goes back to the very beginning of the movie and all the scenes go one by one and you realize oh my god and it was obvious the whole time. 

John 1:28:45
So let me try and piece this because I want to do this step by step. Okay, so I get the nearness because it was censored. It was always there. Because what's changing is not the ontic entity what's changing is its significance or relevance for you. I get that. And I get so it was always there and then in the insight you also get the responsiveness that speaks that intimacy. So that I'm trying to piece this together phenomenologically I've got that always there ness which gives me near ness I got the responsiveness which gives me an intimacy, a mutual affording. And maybe what brings the thouing.

Guy 1:29:23  
Maybe that's how it's revealed. It's one of the things I've noticed with circling people and when people have this experience of feeling deeply seen. It's this profound a sense of intimacy? It is almost when they have it, you realize, oh my God, there's this experience I've been deprived of, my whole life. I didn't even know to look for it. It usually has this way in where somebody gets like, Oh my god, you so care about this? Like they perceive this inherent thing that the person has been grappling with, and that it that there's a being right under there, that's so deeply embedded and cares for it. In fact, they're downstream from it. And then someone brings it into language and they're like, Oh, my God, no one's ever seen me before. And they haven't seen themselves before but it's fundamentally true. So maybe what gets numbed, in with the lack of the I-thou, is that has something to do maybe with what is talked about in the ultimate concern. Always our world is much constituted by our concern, right? So there's the ontological intimacy actually.

John 1:30:57  
So there's the platonic recollection or the Buddhist study, there's a deep remembering. What I'm trying to get at, in the dialogue I feel that I'm seen. Yes, only in the anagoge can I feel that I'm seen. Because that's how the world is that, I get it's intimacy, I get that it's right. Those two come together. There's something more as needed for the thouing. It's something like in the anagoge and its responsiveness to me. It's a really pregnant and good question.

Chris 1:31:58  
I think it has something to do with the Had or being known by the world. So, I'm going to veer into the personifying dangerous, but then maybe we can find a way out again, because this has something to do with it. Something happens to us sometimes in the throes of dialogue with our familiars, such that we realize ourselves known from without, or had from without, and a way that suddenly erupts in gratitude. And gratitude as a disposition and conceals the way ontologically in which we are had and situated beyond ourselves, it goes quickly. 
I had this experience once, which was just a bizarre and profound experience of watching a video of my baptism as a kid. And I'm an infant in this video and the entire cast of my family. Everyone is present in that video, much younger than they were at the time I saw the video. And it's just a bizarre vortex of the experience right to see yourself present, at the center of a proceeding, of which you do not partake in any conscious or egoic manner, but that by which you are constituted. It is the ultimate symbol of a agapic poesis. That is its sacramental function. Gratitude is the way in because gratitude is the revelation of being constituted by forces from without. There was something in that experience of being so beholden and being so known. Now, symbolically it's by family, by persons, but if I were to use that merely as a symbolic proxy, there is a way in which we are had and constituted and empowered by the world from without, that we can realize intermittently in moments of intercourse discourse that manifest as gratitude. 
But that also opens up the the revelation that our constitution is grounded below beyond us such that it is infinitely and recursively realizable in any given moment, that who I am right and this is again harkens Hoover's goes back to the idea of the Divine double or telling extended that to be right the god beyond God, which was his way of trying to solve the the onto a theological problem that you're describing, right? If it's always beyond, and the calcifying effect of idolatry is diminished, at least if not ideated out. So anyway, where am I going with all of this there was something about the experience of being so constituted and the real life ization of being constituted being had by the world and any given moment in time that has something to do with the end. It's a very humiliating and, in the original sense, it's humbling like that. It's somehow a way in.

John 1:36:20
In, it's called thinking, Heidegger tries to ground thinking in thanking. He tries to stay that, if we can't ultimately get back to the thanking, we can't think deeply, because the thinking is ultimately grounded in the thanking. Mary Cohen said something similar to me. Because I'm said, What is it in your phenomenology that calls you towards a personification of the sacred? I've had these mystical experiences and wisdom and self transcendence. And she said, Well, one of the deep feeling phenomenological things we need to redress is gratitude. That gratitude puts us into the being mode and puts us into a relationship. I have a practice every day. It's a neoplatonic practice, where the physical aspects of being because as I say, I do not make them. I emerged from them to participate in think the intelligible aspects because I do not make them I emerged them from them. The vital aspects because they are ultimately presupposed by me, they are the grammar that makes the transgenerativity possible. And so I'm always expressing gratitude towards them. Because in my little ritual, I emerged and I actually say to bring it all the way around, I am grateful for the intelligible because I did not make it, I emerged from it to participate and trust in it. So the gratitude and trusting and all of that stuff come together.

Guy 1:38:04  
I just realized I'm officially late for a meeting. I love that this is completing in its unfinished business because I can tell this is part. As Bateson would say, the difference between a blockbuster movie and an artful movie is a blockbuster movie, like peak crescendo climax, you walk in one way, you go through that and you walk out exactly the same. An artful movie is one in which it arrives as tensions that are never fully complete, where you walk in one way, and you walk out with these existential, not a lot of cold tensions that you work out in the enactment of your life. I literally could just tell this distinction in this question that we're drawing on. I'm going to be walking-talking to you guys in my head and linking things, I'm gonna be living out this. It's an efficient problem that will be self constituting, I'm sure.

John 1:39:28  
Well, that's a fantastic enacting of the platonic dialogues.