Jordan 0:00  
Like standard 20th century physicalist. American paradigm. So it's neat, the capacity of the medium, and also the human relationality that emerges in the context of that capacity, which is to say to people said, there's a new guy doing stuff on the YouTube that you should check out. Hmm. So on the one hand because of the YouTube, he could create the meaning crisis and disseminated it kind of throw the bottle into the ocean. And also, in principle, some billions of people could choose to see it. Yeah. And we're now long enough into this, that there is a culture of kinda like New Yorkers recommending restaurants. This is the thing like I watched it has the right flavor and taste to it of all I'm only take two episodes in but it's it's definitely going to be a your kind of thing and be I think it's going to be the same with David Fuller being one of those one of those two people. 
So there's the fact of the Kismet that we can have these conversations with John and then ultimately with each other. That I think is also is quite interesting and the immediate, almost like the efficient cause of why you and I are talking is that after he and I spoke a few times I can't remember what happened but something in my body settled in that said that such that I found myself saying Working Group on the new religion that isn't a religion, meaning it feels like there's a good possibility of doing something where there's a little nudge, a little push of extra intentionality to coalesce some group, not many, probably five to seven, who get together in some periodicity with in physical space, not via this medium to push the inquiry of a new religion that isn't religion, and probably a new credo. That is always subordinate to religion. Further, meaningfully further, and John recommended you as somebody that would be potentially interested in and bringing particular capacities to this conversation. So that's the the standard order interpretation of how does that become to be talking together today?

Guy 2:56  
I just feel moved in shock and I'm appreciative and there is a way in which I can experience these deep love affairs with people in this space of filosofia right, this quality of dialogue, of disclosure and self disclosure, that is really going through something together. There's a particular kind of love bonding that I experienced that is is something that I just I've been experiencing it with john and multiple people in my life, right my history, I could almost look at my my personal history as different points. In which I had friends, or a friend that went deep into this kind of train of thought that created a whole atmosphere that ended up altering my presuppositions that had been perceived differently. And just the deep personal bonds that I've created with people. So wave of that, right when you when you told me that, huh?

Jordan 4:27  
Reflecting back on my own experiences of that, and even into relationships that were younger, like the the teacher who brought that same context and that feeling of sharpness of life, and richness of possibility and meaningfulness of relationship even if it was just one semester. And then, I guess coming from this direction, there was a feeling of an end down of the term like Omen or moment that when you when you finished what you were saying, and the whole thing sort of landed, almost like a finger pointing or saying, now pay attention, there's something about what just happened or what's going on is particularly meaningful happening. So john mentioned Heidegger, and I'm really interested, really, really quite interested in that. I don't know why my mind jumped to it so quickly, but it's clearly chomping at the bit. So perhaps it is a good idea to run with it. Though I have no particular attachment to follow in that path. At any pace. Perhaps it's better to slow down.

Guy 5:51  
Yeah, totally. A couple things like yeah, Heidegger's a whole world. There's something that haunted him that reveal the level of thinking, or you could say the movement of intelligibility right, that I started to read. For reasons I don't quite understand at the same time that circling was emerging, because I'm not academic. I could paraphrase that completely. 

Jordan 6:48  
That was the dropping of the realization of what it would mean to be dealing with Heidegger in the context of a group of people in a process that actually could enable that group to have a collective capacity.

Guy 7:02  
And this is what's telling, revealing about the world, what Heidegger was doing is I didn't realize the connection between the two until like two or three years later. Where, because I didn't quite understand why I was reading Heidegger because I didn't really understand them. I mean, I'm, I'm dyslexic, and I couldn't learn how to read until I was like 11, and took a heroic teacher to kind of do that for me. And so my reading comprehension is not like the best. So I don't I didn't quite understand why I was reading the hardest philosopher in like, like known demand. But there was something about what he was saying about being that that it was like to, to attempt to understand him what I what I realized was to was to try to understand him and this is similar to my experience. of actually being mentored or being with a teacher, that there's this quality of his Roco, which are as nice as a verb he would say, of participatory. Right participation in which, like with the mentor, when my grandfather who was a Taylor, who was mentored for two years he is he lived in a park in Hanover, Germany, when he would talk about stories about being dwelling with his mentor. There was his dwelling quality, where much of much of the learning wasn't so much about what the tailor said about tailoring. 
It was sitting next to him for hours at a time, right we eating lunch, and all of the sensibility in the history of Taylor hood and his way of being that you kind of dwell in and then you kind of come out in some sense mentored full Through that, right you can carry that way of being right. So I would imagine it's similar to that experience of when you go to a another country, and they come back home and people tell you, you have an accent. It's very much like that. Like for me, that's, there's like what Heidegger says and understanding what he says. And in when people summarize Heidegger, there's missions and stuff he takes. But that's actually not that's not really Heidegger. Heidegger is taking you on this walk of thinking, right? And the point is mostly this, it's the experience of understanding that is, and I was left with because though I would like you read Heidegger so you're like trying to like in order to kind of understand what he's saying you have to step so outside of your frame of reference, right? To then look back and then kind of get it and then Okay, start all over again, right. And I would just do that hours and hours and hours and hours, and then I go and circle Then I do that and I'd circle and I do that in a circle, I do that I'd circle I was back and forth. And then one day, somebody said something that had this vernacular, that was just the accent of circling. 
And it was, I'm like, full shit. All of a sudden hit me I'm like, very funny, very funny grandfather Heidegger. I see this, that he that I what I realized is he taught me actually how to see. Um, we taught me wit like he taught me that there's like you could say, the phenomenological senses is this this awareness of that concealment is and that, that that which is most concealed is that which is most near? And that and that, that kind of looking of getting that sense of a horizon or a halos and also the background and the foreground? Just having this sense of just following that back, that kind of closer and closer and closer in which is in, I would say in circling started to cultivate this deep sense of wonder, right about what I think the way that Vicki talks about is this trans framing this primordial ground, which when you when you realize it, there's this kind of primordial sense of wonderment that comes up. That is also the very experience of when you participate with each other in that sense of wonderment. It's it seems to, it seems to produce the kind of experiences that people call wonder and love and affinity and unreasonable devotion and all you know.

Unknown Speaker  11:53  
Yeah. Wow. Well, I'm not sure if one thing that was running through my way of making sense of what I was perceiving, the sense of a base time. I had it instead of long time ago, where I had realized if you look at a light at a lightning bolt and from the perspective of a person looking at a lightning bolt, it looks jaggedy but from the perspective of the lightning bolt, it's a perfectly straight life because We're looking at it from what you might call a neutral third person perspective through space. It's perceiving the galvanic potential to is proceeding along the the gradient of galvanic potential and it's simply following the straightest path through the tritium governmental potential. Yeah. So from its perspective, it's traversing a straight line. Yeah. And then I was imagined the notion of a circle circling but a circle. And the circle has a, from a, again, objective third person space time perspective, I can say that you're in a circle when there are a group of people oriented, I would imagine in a u haul facing inward, geometrically. Yeah, same place at the same time. Yeah. Yeah. But then I was having this flash of, for example, when I was reading, Manuel de Landa. Actually, that book right there, and how it connected with a conversation that I've been having in my head. Of course with Judah lawyers, and there was a flash of insight as the two connected. And I had this feeling of it being as if we were in a circle, but me hated through a phenomenology that has a different frame of reference. Yeah. That makes sense. Yeah, it does.

Guy 14:24  
Can you say more about the frame of reference?

Jordan 14:33  
Yeah. Oh, man. Well, if we just zoom in on the conversation we're having right now. Yeah. And I can feel myself getting lost. So if I get lost, please bring me back. What we can notice is that there's a very fun, objective illusion that we're having a conversation with each other. In some sense, this is as if we were face to face. You separated by a couple of feet. Yeah. And yet, of course, if I noticed was happening in reality, it couldn't be further from the truth. In fact, it's quite likely that the sound waves that are being projected into my microphone electrically and converted into digital signals inside my laptop packet to the up in TCP IP packets and then spewed across the internet through the protocol that may in fact be jumping through satellites into space and back down. Which then are emerged converted to analog signals in your laptop. The medium that enables that creates a So think about that like the lightning bolt. There's a objective perspective on our point of view that collapses that entire complexity of the underlying reality of what packets space would perceive as a hell of a job into something that is isomorphic to a face to face conversation. Yeah, right. Yeah. So if I can run that same projection here in simulated Face to face conversation using a medium, a variety of different media construct, I could do the inverse. And I could say, Oh, well it looks like the medium of capitalists and producing books and shipping them to me via Amazon and projecting text into my eyeball that was glued to paper. I medically copying the texting was actually scripted by in this case dillos into londa over a different time frame, same exact thing in reverse. And point of fact, I am actually in a circle with them. But that circle is propagating through reality and a different kind of way. And if we can actually grok the consequences of the media, on the way that the consciousness is actually able to form itself as a coherent singularity. Then we're doing something interesting. Hey, I don't think I got lost, I actually pulled it off.

Guy 16:55  
You really did pull it off. How old is how many kids do you have?

Jordan 17:10  
I have three. I have a 17 year old, 15 year old and I have an 11 month old.

Guy 17:15  
Okay, so that's what I got from one of your interviews. You talked about just having a newborn, how's that? 

Jordan 17:23  
It's incredible actually, it's funny because going in, I've done it before, twice, and paid a lot of attention. I wasn't just passing through. And one of the things that I knew about myself was that, to be perfectly honest, I don't find the first six months of children to be particularly interesting. Not my thing. But after six months, it starts to build and now 11 months it's out of this world, how nice it is and how delightful and almost always, and the ability to now be so fully present both in terms of time, I can choose how I want to spend my time. And so I allocate my time to best advantage for our relationship, my relationship with my daughter and my wife, but then also the the self, the self that I am, and the capacity of this self to be present in herself. No words, but it's nice.

Guy 18:40  
When they're first born, the first six months, they're like an amoeba. Yeah, and they're all mom, right? They're a bunch of tubes that build up pressure and then mop happens, and then that release, and then we help with the cleanup.

Jordan 19:01  
Yep. Every once in a while, we walk around in circles for a while, so mom can get some sleep.

Guy 19:10  
Exactly. How long have you been married?

Jordan 19:14  
Five years. And a previous marriage, it was for 18 years.

Guy 19:18  
Okay, got it. And how is it? How's it being married? Just now, you have a child between the two of you?

Jordan 19:26  
Well, the basis of our relationship was a choice, a conscious choice to enter into a very conscious evolutionary relationship. And so then to have a child was also a very conscious choice taking over a solid two years of really building the capacity to even understand what it would mean to make that, as a choice. Oh, and being quite aware of the implications for the relationship. And again, it has been astounding. Of course, very painful, very challenging, broken, bent things that had seemed solid or easy. But just thinking, continuing to increase the surface area of the possibility of relationship. 

Guy 20:33  
I feel I'm in the midst of being utterly struck by how being married is completely affected me in ways not anticipated. 

Jordan 20:50
How long have you been married? 

Guy 20:52
I've been married about nine months. I've been with the woman I'm married to going on about eight and a half years with a year and a half gap in between there. And I'm really struck, now I was married before in my early 20s. For about 14 years, and it just wasn't the same thing. There's really this sense of where I didn't even realize To what degree I had not experienced what I'm experiencing now. Now that I'm wedded but it feels like there's a certain kind of surrender where I really did wed my being and it feels very much as if the right thing got put in the center of the mandala. And then I had this ontological chiropractic shift like somebody. Being the child of a secular humanist, I'm like, Whoa, there's really something to this marriage thing. What I actually really mean that in this deep sense of potential realized in this, this sense of dropping in that deeply with somebody in such a local way. And I was listening to an entrepreneur podcast, Venture stories. And I really liked it and I got this feeling where almost like my proprioception of time went in all directions, this kind of greater picture and then I got landed in the sense of, stick to what's real, right? Like 10 year relationship, and all like that, but where I felt stretched, and then all of it was coherent. Being with what's most real and bring your attention on that and that's my wife, my relationship with my wife, but also way that I treat my neighbor, the way that I eat. It just felt like those things were so much more salient just through listening to you. But also had so much more of the whole inside of it, very wholesome.

Jordan 24:32  
Yeah. So I am almost never listen to a podcast that I've been on and my first person experiences is that I'm very into not thinking about what I'm saying. Yeah. And so I actually had very little memory of the podcast that I'm in. So this is actually the first time I've actually gotten feedback on that particular podcast. So thank you.

Guy 25:04  
Listening to it sometime, I would recommend it.

Jordan 25:09  
Yea, I will try. Yeah, that can be interesting and fun. It kind of makes sense, the way you're describing it. I think we can even be just in the middle of it. So what I was doing just then, it's like pulling taffy. You said wholeness and wholesome. I was trying to stay connected. And to bring two polar stretch that connectedness into the context of the moment while maintaining the continuity of the connectedness. That's my endeavor. And it's funny, making a lot of weird noises and blowing my eyes, and this is a lot closer to juggling than it is to talking. It's weird. I'm not quite sure what's happening. I prefer not to try to describe it too much. It feels like the kind of thing that turns into a credo that isn't subordinate to a religion. 

Guy 26:55
What do you understand about it that it makes sense to not try to describe it?

Jordan 27:14  
That question there is very powerful. There's a lot of importance of potency that is implicated in the inquiry, it has to do with the effort to be able to speak about this question is very challenging. It has to do with the necessity of preventing the inauthentic articulation of meaning in subordination to. Wow, God is really hard. I'm trying very hard not to simply be a Taoist. The easiest thing would be to say that that which is endeavoring to express itself is precisely that which cannot be said. But that doesn't answer the question in the least.

Guy 28:39  
If we just look at just for a second, so this is what I'm experiencing, listening to you, is that whatever it is that we probably won't say. But we'll say in the not saying, it's right, this sense of orientation That has it make sense to respond to it with both effort and care already reveals something to me about it. Like I, I feel that just as I'm listening in the kind of guitar and there's a sense in which there's something about the respectfulness of it, and the sense of at the effort that's worth it and the particular hardness but the engagement with already reveals it in some way. To me.

Jordan 29:35  
The words that come up that are very easy, that simplify, but also have exactly the characteristic of doing the thing that we're trying to avoid. Yeah, are things like sacred and profane. Paul Vanderclay.. I was watching a portion of a conversation between John and Paul. I don't know anything about Paul's background at all, unfortunately I'm quite cold. They were talking about the hebreic ellision of the name of God and that that is not something that is spoken and I think it has to do with carefulness as you said care. Yeah, there's a few more things that start to pour out, these are connected. They're not the center of it, but they come with it like fellow travelers. What's the Whitman home? Is there like gibbering slendy i'd shambles that come slouching along with the profane. We have our marketers for example, and our idols. letters that once it is named, it is very easy to be able to articulate the sounds that are framed in the words so that they sound like the thing that is being said that are not it. And in fact precisely get between the soul and the thing.

Guy 31:17  
Concealment. Yeah, the sense of like the sense of disclosure. Well, if you think about reveal, I caught wind of this just the other day. I'm just like, I was thinking about this. This is the word reveal. One. Something that's veiled. Right. First a discloses bout like something's precious enough to veil. You only veil that which is precious enough. But to read veil means both ways, right to reveal it. And to reveal. Yes, it's revealing quality of disclosure of that. And that's one of the things it's Heidegger had one thought, My understand of the one thought his whole life dedicated to think, was what is the question of the being of beings? And how do you another talk about context without making it a content? How do you disclose being that that the way in which it discloses self is in its, it reveals itself in its simultaneously withdraw? Yeah, right. So there's still there's a way in which I feel right at the center of that with you in some regard and that something about that leafy and a sense of the awareness that concealment is because I was thinking about like moments of insight. Right. And, and this is, you would say, this is exactly what Heidegger would say is, is that concealment itself is concealed in our modern times right in the age of technology in its in framing sense of that the being of beings is a standing reserve awaiting our optimization in that which it but here's the thing, you said you're from Texas?

Jordan 33:23  
I am, I was born there. 

Guy 33:25
Which part of Texas? 

Jordan 33:30
I was born in Lubbock and I was raised in the hill country. West of Austin, northwest of San Antonio.

Guy 33:34  
Got you, Plano Texas Okay, I know it. Like there's this way that that track homey shopping center um it like lots of Texas with these huge track homes that go on for miles, like this is hell. So I cannot be there. My son lives there and I can't stay there for more than three days. I feel like I just need to commit suicide or something. There's something so fundamentally awful about it. But what one of the things that makes it hell for me is that no one's walking around going, this is hell.

Jordan 34:30
We're in a very odd spot right now, because I was thinking almost exactly the same thoughts about four hours ago. Yeah, and one thing that makes it hell is that no one's walking around. Full stop. Yeah, if you walk around, you'll notice no one's walking around.

Guy 34:42  
And no one's going like this is awful. So that's one of the things that you say that Heidegger would say that's the ontotheology of our times that that that concealment has concealment itself has become concealed. Like a truly dark time is not when people are like, yes, it's dark. It's where no one knows that it's dark.

Jordan 35:07  
It can be very simple, very personal. About we were talking earlier, before we started recording about the way that there's an experience of this conversation happening through zoom, where the, the framing of your face up close, and also the way that the body is sort of locked in. We go into this fugue state where we're actually not being aware of the physical sensations of our body, the amount of energy that we're pouring into this experience so that when we're done, we're kind of like unplugged and like, Oh my god, it was like three days worth of experience that happened in an hour. Right. And that's, that's a lot of very similar and many people experience that you know, the experience of remember when my oldest daughter, and much to my chagrin, we were Not thoughtful about this book, she watched the TV show to watch many but particularly one called Teletubbies. And I remember the experience of when I turned off the TV, she would actually get physically enraged. 
And the the disconnect between where you are, who you are the the experience that you're having, and then your body's experience, you know that that ability to have your body and your mind be differentially experiencing what's happening, and to actually not be in right relationship with each other is very common, like almost everyone has that experience almost all the time. And it's a very nice, like, simple way of articulating that thing you were talking about. And then when you have that experience, that experience of the would you call him the suburban strip mall? Hell, yeah. It's the archeo is the ontological design equivalent of that same phenomenon, I think they're distinctly connected. The only way that we can endure living in suburban strip mall hell is that we spend almost all of our time looking at a flickering screen that's causing our mind to feel like it's getting meaningfulness and pushing the chemicals into our body that generates the simulation of meaningfulness. And then we go to sleep.

Guy 37:29  
And one thing I just noticed is the pace is different. There's an orientation, I feel like something is gathering a little bit more. 

Jordan 38:03
So when you pointed it out, I agree that is the case. But I also noticed that prior to you're pointing it out, I was in it, not noticing it. Something about that is part of the why or what is happening.

Guy 38:29  
Oh that that in it first and not noticing it. And then the pointing it out and realizing that I was in it without noticing it is part of the very thing that is gathering. To bring in something that you said earlier, like one, one of the things that kind of just I think also touched me in the beginning when you talk when you talk to me about when you said something about something about, yeah, I think it's time to gather the people, right? The religion of no religion or the non religious religion, that that particular thing that readiness to kind of come to form with something. Part of what moved me was what I gather from you, and just my experience of you and the sensibility of the way that you move and the way the cadences of your voice and where your attention goes is that one of the things that has just been like sits like keeps communicating itself, to my listening of you is this real clear and awareness of a date. I don't know if the word is clutching onto something, such that it goes in a predictable route of it, so it's interesting. Part of the thing that hit me was I was going like oh, that you're wanting to do that that is it's coming to make sense to even consider to bring some form to this or gather the people right around. It's like almost like get given my sense of you that just that just sent that sounded meaningful to me but also like risky and I felt a little like I was touched. Be a part of that risk, right? If that's the case, but the felt sense of the whole thing that I just tried to unpack right there.

Jordan  41:11  
So first, I just like to share my appreciation for what it is you bring into this conversation have brought, and I hope to, that you continue to bring, not just in this conversation, but over time. The qualities and skillfulness of both being aware and communicating things that seemed to have a lot of, yeah, again, this wholeness or wholesomeness, really, I feel a lot of care on your part to actually be mindful of where the balance is and making sure that the balance is being brought in. When things go in a certain direction, just sort of bring things into that maybe aren't quite being heard. Maintaining the the integrity of the circle of the sphere. So very much appreciate that appreciation received to the point. And yes, I think this this sense feels quite right. I feel a similar sense of trepidation to walk closely to tread carefully on this possibility.
It feels to me like the way that a crystal might emerge in a saturated solution. Almost maybe not quite, but close. And I think the point would be to actually get it from close to all the way to the way that a stay stem cell or set of clusters of stem cells would choose to differentiate into their particular tissues. So this context, the being of being, but as you say, very easy to yank that out of its place.

Guy 43:56  
Can I ask you, what is it like to consider to find you, and I would imagine it's like finding yourself considering bringing people together in something like the religion of religion also also like what, you know, just if you can, if there's any more form about that, that you can, you can share like the thoughts and some of the ideas of what you see. But what is it like to watch yourself actually start to look at some specifics around it.

Jordan 44:33  
So the first part that comes up is something like when you're listening to something you can't quite make out what it is. And then you start to be able to understand what it is that you're listening to. So a song that has been in my soul for a very long time that suddenly someone say like john says something, and it's more than a remembering that it is or recognition. Ah ha, that's the sound of it. That's what it sounded like. That's the thing that was being said. That's the sound that it's sort of been murdering in the back of my mind for the past 40 years. Okay. And then a pacing of that. There's a feeling of a coalescence where there's a emerging possibility that seems to have a almost like a rushing or zooming to it and they a notion of a second, running back Somehow it's hard to this is very poor language. 

Guy 46:06
The first one just totally rocked me. I heard the song of you hearing your song coming into articulation. You spoke of listening is real meaningful for me.

Jordan 46:34  
This is the thing that was somebody talked to me about a way of perceiving the moment the present. Yeah. We typically find ourselves and again there's a lot of Heidegger here about proceeding the present as the consequence of the past as say A rocket ship driven by the past into the future. But there's also we have pursued the present as a sailing ship being drawn into the future pulled into the future with no connection to the past, leaving the past behind. And that's what I mean by that experience of almost like going backwards. Yeah. You can't, you're not like proceeding but you're walking backwards, you're not seeing ahead where you're going. Rather, it's almost like you as you see it, you see it as you past it, and you're feeling it behind you, you're feeling the emerging thing behind you and around you flowing through it. And then as it shows up, you can begin to see it and you can begin to name it. And you can begin Oh, that's how they are there. It is a hot, but you're actually not without skill in this movement. There's a way to actually use that sensibility and the sensitivity of what it is this going on in that directionality to be able to guide your choices. So that even though the capacity to see and to name it, which was for such a long time, front and center is actually inverted and backwards. Nonetheless, it actually is a more relevant way. Yeah. Navigating. That's what it feels like.

Guy 48:15  
So he's got the sense of future to past to present of, it just really does remind me of Heidegger of that, that sense of it, but what do you say is like the past being having a gravity, right, of the historicity of that's like, not history like you know, a series of a events that are available to everybody, right? But history in the sense of the way that you and I are sitting, that it makes sense to sit in the way that we are that we're on a chair that were upright that were that you went like this, that that there's a like that all that has intelligibility is a layer in gravities. Yeah. of customs of social practices of cultures of that we live, right. Yet, that history is, in some sense, the big is the history of the constant becoming of the future. Right, the calling is forward. Right? And so the present is that point where it's it goes, Future Past. And then the present is the mutuality of those points where it goes, it comes into comes into like music like with music, you only hear your pick up the note, but actually the note animates the tension. Of the, like the long gating rhythms of the past and then the the anticipation of the future is what you is the experience of the music. It's not the animated note of the present. So that sense of richness. And when you said, whoo.

Jordan 50:22  
I had an experience with a gentleman named Josh, who's a truly masterful guitar player, like capital M. And we were in it. We're in an Oscar ceremony. Yeah. And he was playing music as part of it. And he wasn't playing songs. He was playing music. Which is to say that every note that was struck was new in universe and the relationship with the context that it was in and never been played before would never be played. it again. And I listened very closely for a while for like an hour, two hours. I don't know how long it was, as you can imagine. He did not strike a single false note. He played continuously for hours. And every note was perfectly placed between the note before and after, and then never been played before. He was not playing a song, but rather he was creating music. That I think is that's a very nice way of speaking to this. So that's that also really probably is that notion of concealment. Yeah, if I if I whistle the tune of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony. There's something very, very different. Very different about that. Yeah. Not the same. Yeah. That's the past, right? That's the past reanimating itself through me. Yeah. As opposed to the future revealing itself through me.

Guy 51:54  
Well, in some way the past is already reached. It seems the past only shows up in it's bringing gravity to the nurturing forth of a possibility, right? This weaving sense of it. And most of the things that I call genuinely good in my life have started with the sense of, I'm going along, and then something shines forth. Right? And if I'm fortunate enough, I just can't stop looking at it right and then start moving in that direction. But the things that have been really deep for me, have been this process of 20 years later, I'm still finding out what I was interested in. And then the trail that's left behind is like our methodologies and religions and a whole series of things of me finding out what I was interested in, or what grabbed or seized me. This I don't actually understand. How do I know to be struck by something before I understand it to be struck by it?

Jordan 53:35  
Yeah, and that is such a mystery. If it may be a mystery, and we find ourselves dancing around the light of religion on that exact note. Yeah. I've had the same exact experience. Yeah, it's the way you were describing Heidegger made me laugh because I had the feeling with with Lloyd Ah, yeah, where I'm sitting there and I had this feeling of just like, I must be like, held in like smacked up against it, you know, for years just boom, boom, and you know, just cracking open the anti Oedipus and just reading through the whole thing and going I don't know what the fuck just happened like I mean I don't even know if I recall a single word that was said but that what's going on and then I read and read and read and just like as you say like it's like this absorption this this digestion is metabolism. 
What is it? What is it that brings you into that and and locks you into it like doesn't make sense why in God's name would you spend that much time? Yeah, doing something that you can't justify, you cannot it does not make sense. The whole point is it doesn't make sense and yet it is the very center of that which is well shoot, stop myself from speaking because something else popped in. One of the things I've noticed and we could even say to have become wise wisdom. So as I've gotten older, wisdom for me is personally Nicely the ability to have had those experiences to say, Oh, it's another one of those again. Okay. Yeah, you know, I've been through I've seen you before. I'm quite certain that I haven't the slightest idea what's going on here and that's okay. Because everything that's really mattered has been like this. So I'm gonna stick with this.

Guy 55:19  
There's a way that I could come to know that not knowing, where my character becomes shaped into someone that can not know more. It just felt like two monkeys for a moment. 

Jordan 56:05  
Yeah. Which you can imagine, because we're doing the same thing. When the first monkey naps the Flint. And it's woah, yes, can we do that again? Wait a moment. Yea, that was sacred, that was the thing, so I'd like to extend honour and gratitude in that direction.

Guy 57:13  
Nice to meet you.

Jordan 57:16  
I very much look forward to seeing what comes with this. And I would say that though I do not know that you have any such intent, if anyone wants to watch this video, I would have no inhibitions against that. Man, this was fun!