Collin 0:02  
How's it going, Jordan? 

Jordan 0:10
It's going well, it's a very nice day.

Collin 0:41  
Okay, cool. So maybe I can just say a little bit about the the impetus for this idea. So the reason for this conversation was I was interested in double clicking on one of the really important pieces of the idea of cultivating sovereignty. And that's relationship to money and wealth. And I've been learning more about wealth creation, I haven't been interested in it before. I come from a performing arts background, and I've never felt like it was my ballgame. So I never really paid much attention to it. Until very recently, one of my ways in was hearing people in this particular space, Game B, sort of system thinking space. A lot of what the thinkers had in common was some success in on some entrepreneurial activity or venture that led to wealth. From an outsider's perspective, seeing what your experience has been Jordan is somebody who invested a lot of front end energy into creating freedom for yourself the only reason you've been able to do like the deep thinking and deep sea diving into this Game B space is because you had the freedom to do it You didn't have to work up you didn't have a clock in at a nine to five job so so as we're talking about Game B and transition be like what like what do new business ventures look like in this new space that where people are thinking about what what's coming next? Yeah, and a crucial piece just feels like being right relationship with with money and we had a previous Yesterday and one of the one of the things that which I think is a good place to start is you made a distinction between wealth and prosperity. Do you remember that at the top of the conversation? Does that feel like a good place to dive in?

Jordan 3:16  
Yeah, I think so. I was also thinking about our call yesterday and some notions in that area came up for me somewhere you can weave it together. And another concept that came up for me that felt very close to connected was just a more basic notion called choice making. And, you know, one of the ways that we can look at the notion of money is that money at the end of the day is a proxy for choice making. And so, if I'm paying you if you're my employee, one of the things that is part of that relationship is that I'm giving you money, and you're giving me your choices, meaning, I get to tell you what to do to some extent, right and to a greater or lesser extent, depending on the nature of the relationship. And I think that's a really nice way to, to begin to walk into least one aspect of the question. So this question is distinct between wealth and prosperity came up when you were talking about your own experience of having a story. Yeah. of the inevitable corrupting characteristics of Well, yeah, to make to have money and to have made money differently. Both involve different levels of unreasonable on inappropriate corruption.
And when I talked about it, this distinction, wealth and prosperity which I mentioned, by the way, this you could just use this as two terms. Like I don't want to anchor on either one of those. Now, neither of those terms has a long Eddie of a lot etymological lineage that I'd like sort of pointed as being more right rather than just saying there's two ways of looking at it. And saying that there's something about one direction or one origin or One disposition or or basis of approach, that we can call wealth or on the left hand side, that tends to be more closely associated with, with with personal corruption, things that are reducing your sovereignty and external corruption, things that are actually reducing other people's sovereignty, making actions in the world reduce other people's sovereignty. And we might say that at the center of that is is choices on the basis of fear. And then we talked about the notion of prosperity, which has the characteristic of increasing your sovereignty, and also synergistically as you make choices out in the world tends to increase other people's sovereignty. 
And we might say that on the basis of love, and if those of you who are familiar with Forrest landers work, I'm clearly referencing that in some way. Although my level of masterpiece work is nowhere near high enough to say that I'm sourcing from it but the distinctions that I'm making our clearly echoed in or echoing what he's written about in his book, The Effective choice and the ethics. So, so I'll give you some examples that I've thought of over the past few days. And this is one landed this morning. That was quite interesting. And it's true. This is in terms of just having well, so there's no right now just talking about how you how you how you get well, but just the act of having it. So just a pile of money lands on your lap magic. And I think this is actually quite interesting. So what that is to say is that a pile of choice making a pile of the capacity to have your, your will your what you want to be the case has just shifted in the world, like you now have much more ability to influence the nature of choice in the world than you did before. And one of the questions is how much and I've actually had this conversation with a number of people, and the actually seems to be a converging notion that one, there needs to be a symmetry between your sovereignty and your choice, making capacity. 
So, as you have more than say, wisdom as an aspect of sovereignty, as you have more capacity to make choice as you people, more and more people are looking to you to be making choices either on their behalf or with their consent or us and you need to have more wisdom to be able to carry that amount of choice. So that's one piece like this, that notion of symmetry and being very mindful of it. But then we had this interesting artifact that because of the nature of money, money, in many ways is certainly decouples. As to you can you can have money without having wisdom. And in many ways, in fact goes the opposite. The less money you have, maybe the more possibility of money you might have. Within this is a really interesting thing, which is, it is fair to say, and we should just have a number of conversations with quite thoughtful people, that no human can have enough wisdom to be able to make effective choices beyond about 100 million dollars. So if you have More than 100 million dollars, you're not making effective choices. 
It's just impossible. Like if you have a billion dollars, you're actually making ineffective choices, no matter how wise and sovereign you are. There's just way too much asymmetry. Like if you think about how much choice making invited in money, so how much wealth, the average person has, the average American has, you know, whatever. $50,000 worth of network, maybe less, I don't know, there's a lot of debt going around. Never human probably has, you know, close close to a buck. Right. So maybe less again, so let's just say it's $1 per person on the planet, and you happen to have a billion dollars. Well, in some sense, what that says is that you have to have at least a billion times as much wisdom to be able to have the enough wisdom to carry that amount of choice making capacity, and that ain't going to happen, and presumably 100 million dollars to a pretty high standard like that seems also pretty darn impossible. But as an interesting kind of touristic It seems that it's plausible, like a really doesn't Like a reasonable proposition to say, in terms of creating wealth in terms of having well, and then you creating wealth and having wealth. Once you've made about $10 million, you beginning to get into a zone where you're increasingly likely to be having more choice making capacity that you can actually deploy, with wisdom with effect to make effective choices with that. And if you blown past 100 million, you have almost certainly put yourself in a place where you're just going to be making more trouble more more bad than good. Kind of an optimistic, it's a funny thing to say. And I remember when I first got into the entrepreneurship gamma class first getting involved in that very first startup. I remember thinking to myself that $10 million was an insane amount of money, like I didn't grow up with any meaningful amount of money. In fact, we were reasonably poor for a sizable fraction, although not all of it. And I remember being like if somebody came to me and said, you know, the way this is going to work out is you're going to do X and at the end of next you're going to have $10 million. I would have gone like yes. Done signed, like we're gonna cap. 
And if they come in said, Look, here's the deal, you're gonna get your work and it's gonna be hard like low like them success, hard work, and we're going to cap you can make no more than 100 million dollars, I would have just laughed at, I quit. That's it, you basically just do a magic number. I mean, these aren't real numbers, it's not a real thing. And I'm saying that maybe that's actually a really good idea. Like as an individual, if you're going into entrepreneurship, you're going into the startup gig. For example, if you're really trying to go hard in the direction of moving a whole bunch of gamey chips from other people to yourself, which is what's happening, right? You're taking choice making away from some people and giving it to yourself. If you if you've done something where $10 million has it has accrued to your side of the balance sheet. At that's the point at which taking your foot off the accelerator is an increasingly wise choice. And you probably shouldn't be making a whole lot more than like 3040 unless it's just not like you just did something where it's just gonna kind of have something And if you read more than 100, you've probably actually been doing something that has been caught too much in the direction of making too much money and not in the direction of actually making effective choices. As a heuristic as a heuristic. 
Now, notably, oddly enough, in some of these conversations, we actually were able to identify certain locations where some of the some of the objectives, the things that were being endeavored were almost certainly important, like needed to happen. And it seemed to be very much part of the vocation like the calling of the individual. It's Elon Musk and switching the world from oil to electricity. Like, it's probably a really good idea. Like what's in the path of viable futures is that shift, and it seems like he's uniquely called to do that. There's something about his very being that seems to be uniquely called to do that, and to the degree to which he is truly fully in service to his calling, and also money is flowing through that. That seems plausible, but then you look at something like neural lace and you're like, huh, neural lace feels like it may be something where his choice making is now too high and that's not his calling I don't think it feels very much like he's doing something where he has the ability to make it happen in the world but it's not really his to do and there's an error is beginning to emerge on that side.

Collin 12:28  
Wait, I'm just curious how you pick up on that. Is it making that distinction between oh this might not be his calling, is it because he's clearly put so much energy into other things already, is it tacking another thing on?

Jordan 12:44
No, if you listen to the thought process that goes into Neural Lace, it's he's basically reverse engineering. He's working backwards from a story that he doesn't really have a solid grounding in. Like he's kind of downward interpolating saying, Well, it looks like the AI story and the singularity story is really big and really dangerous. And I sure mystics are telling me that the only viable path is when man and machine merge. And so we're going to make that happen. But it doesn't feel like it's something that he's embodying all the way down to the bottom. Like if you were to really go in and start beginning to ask deep questions about the nature of synapses and the nature of consciousness, like these kinds of hard questions that honestly, if you're going to be promoting human brain augmentation into machines, you should have been, you should be a master of this field. This should be your fucking life. Like you shouldn't be even the least bit of a tourist.

Collin 13:44  
You shouldn't give a shit about cars. At that point, you should give zero shits about cars.

Jordan 13:47  
Yeah, exactly. That's what you're doing. It should be 100% of your focus, that you can't even distinguish yourself in it. And that's my point. And that's what I mean by calling, so that kind of branch So this is the best stop there. So that was the point of saying, Okay, let's talk about choice making and this notion of the symmetry between your sovereignty and the amount of choice making that you're literally able to carry, like, how much responsibility can you actually take in the world, and be likely quite likely to make effective choices with that responsibility. And the notion that there's almost certainly just an upper limit that no human being could ever carry more than a certain amount of responsibility, which then shows up as an upper limit to the amount of wealth that you should ever accrue to yourself.

Collin 14:32  
Do you think if someone's really tuned into their calling, they'll have an idea of how much responsibility they should be taking on?

Jordan 14:42  
Yeah, yeah, I think this actually has a bunch of different characteristics to it. And he said, Really, let me just focus on that word, because it has a lot of nuance to it. So one piece is something like some people who are attracted to the story of game B puts themselves too much into it. They're trying to carry more than is theirs to carry back, sometimes just trying to carry the whole thing. Oftentimes, they're like, I'm the only one like they don't they've never met anybody else who's really earnestly like, sees it and feels it and just as committed to it. And so like August Fuck, I guess I'm just gonna have to do the whole thing. Yeah. And this is of course, too heavy. It's way too much, no human could possibly carry the whole thing, even vaguely.

Collin 15:30  
Yeah. Can I say something about that? I think a lot of the engagements happening on social media, and twitter, for example, is like where a lot of these sorts of conversations happen. And Twitter definitely selects for a kind of pithiness. Like a like really sort of, like if you were good at writing philosophy papers in college and like you have a decent sense of humor when you write like, Twitter is going to select for those sort of ideas or means that pop up? I think what you're saying about people feeling like they need to take on more than it's theirs. There might be just like a lack of imagination of the laboratories that these sorts of ideas could be, could be played in. Does that make sense?

Jordan 16:18  
No, and I'm sure it does. But I didn't follow. So it felt like a shift that happened there. There's something in that shift that I didn't proceed.

Collin 16:23  
Okay. Okay. I think this is it. Because Twitter or social media is like the public square, where these ideas are talked about. It's one facet of engaging with these ideas. Like there are other places for example, experiments with collectives, in person collectives, that may not be open sourcing their experiments on the internet.

Jordan 16:53  
Or maybe we just haven't found them because the internet's a gigantic, you know, mess.

Collin 16:58  
Yeah, yeah. So I guess the whole point of what I was saying is people taking on too much, part of it just feels like for what's selected for in the public square right now.

Jordan 17:12  
So maybe I need to say some things back. So let's imagine that there's a really big story. Oh, how fun. Are you with the concept of transmedia?

Collin 17:21  
Transmedia.. I can put the two words together. 

Jordan 17:25
Well, that's funny because if you use like the transcendent sense, like Kantian transcendence, and then you combine that with media, and you look at it. That's an interesting combination, you're definitely in the right zone. But for the moment, I'll just make it a little bit more prosaic, and then we pop it back up. But one of the things that we learned in transmedia is that each medium is kind of has its thing. So if I'm trying to tell a story, and the story should be told in a comic book, because of the nature of the story, and the nature of Medium, and I tried it to that story in a movie, I'm doing something wrong, it won't land right like the medium just can't carry the characteristics of whatever it is, is the nature of that particular story. rightly, to make it more obvious, like if I'm trying to tell a story that, that should be told in a painting, and I'm trying to tell it in a radio play, that's gonna be hard. Like, and you see green, and the brushstrokes are thick, you know, that's just as an obvious, you know, each medium can carry different aspects. What transmedia says is, Hey, man, there is no story that any one medium can hold. 
And in fact, all media and by all media, I mean, literally all phenomenon in physical reality that can carry signal must be considered as part of the way that you're expressing the whole story. Like the whole store is a whole story. It's a whole thing. And so Twitter can't carry the whole story. Facebook can hear the whole story, money can't carry the whole story. Grass can't carry the whole story. Human beings can't carry the whole story like it's the whole field, the whole field of possibility, the whole field of reality that you That can carry a story is what we need to be contemplating. And then then we need to have a high degree of the stetic discernment, which is, and I'm using that word now, in slightly new way, which is to actually have a high degree of sensitivity towards what is exactly the right media or more media like combinations to carry this particular aspect. So that the aspect is most fully expressed with the least amount of noise coming from the media that were selected. And by the direction, the media are not adding and are not subtracting from what is trying to be expressed through those media. So that's something that came to me as a result of what we're talking about.

Collin 19:42
Wait, say more about aesthetic discernment, more about the qualities of a person who has that capacity. 

Jordan 19:50
Hmm, this is a super powerful thing. We're way off topic, but maybe we'll come back.

Collin  19:55  
No, no, it's on topic.

Jordan  19:58  
Okay, I trust you. I trust you completely. So, I'll bridge two things, we've got participatory knowing? Oh, fun. Yeah, this is a conversation I was having on Facebook actually, with a woman who's an artist. So participatory knowing in the Vervaeke sense, what he calls relevance realization, which we might think of as being a diffuse, broad, subtle, and multimodal meaning, all the different ways that your body has of perceiving and knowing. And you're directly like hand-in-hand in relationship with reality. The difference in your part of it because the whole point of a participatory knowing is that you are not in third person looking at something and trying to be separate from it and sort of scientifically analyzing it. But you're just in it, and there's something about the way that you are of it. That gives you a way of sense What it is that you couldn't possibly send if you're just looking at it. And then what I want to do is I want to bring in another set of languages which would be in fact from forest to work where she talks about different also different modes. 
And here the motive the quality of feeling. So the difference a for example between a semantics knowing, propositional and we're basically talking about top down from his stack propositional to participatory and we know in language that when we know in language and the way that our mind is able to process signs and symbols or signals, in schema and in paradigms that make sense through that modality for us talks about this other one, the qualities that feeling that come from the bottom up in that sense like from the ground up through us, and they come they come in the shop is being very subtle. So if you're sensitive to subtle qualities of feeling. This is how you For example, I think I've talked about this previously, if you're playing music and you're not playing written music, written music is when you're playing from from sides, like you're reading some sign, you're just producing the mechanical thing the signs are telling you to produce, which are listening to what wants to be expressed in the music. And you're just making yourself increasingly capable of sensing what is the next note that needs to happen? And almost being of service to that next note becoming more and more transparent? 
Well, this is what force we call the quality of human these and we could have an infinite number of qualities of feeling and we can name feelings, but I could give you some one feeling might be sadness, like that's a pretty common feeling that we can share very easily. Then we've got like the quality of feeling of melancholy. Okay, that's a little bit more and we've all kind of had melancholy if I could describe it as well. Interesting, some nuance there. Like Yeah, well, let's let's go with the kind of melancholy of when your kid is going away to College, oh, well that's a, an even different flavor, right, you can notice like the qualities of the flavor of feeling are, in fact, actually infinite because they're directly associated with the infinity of what it is to be experiencing reality, the whole of reality. So when I said ascetic discernment, I was saying, developing skillfulness in the prototype precisely these modalities, the participatory knowing, and qualities of feeling and becoming capable of using those modalities to sense the characteristics of the expression, what is it, what is it that wants to be expressed in this transcendent mode before does Express right if I were to think it at all, in any in any way, see it, smell it, taste it, I'm already embodying it in that medium. 
So the most subtle, the most subtle characteristic of this thing that wants to be expressed not yet expressed in any way, and then having sensitivity to the characteristics of the ways the modes of expression, you know, painting or Radio that our most harmonious with the essence of what it is that wants to be expressed and then to be able to skillfully do that. So that'll be authentic discernment will be those three characteristics simultaneously. We might call that an individual who's who's has that a master artist or a great artist, someone like a Picasso who could take the essence of the feeling of Guernica, and then could actually modulate into that into into physical expression. But imagine if you had somebody who was sort of like Picasso and Beethoven, you know, Guernica really actually needs to be more in the music domain. And then in the painting domain, or the Ninth Symphony needs to actually be painted not music, but I'm no longer bound to any given medium. I can now express myself through all possible media with that level of master like that would be the God Mode and that particular skill.

Collin 24:54  
Yeah, wow, okay. When you were first talking, I immediately saw its connection to relationship with money. And then I did it for a while, and then maybe it kind of circled back. So, let me take a crack at where I want to go. The idea of propositional versus participatory knowing. It feels like stories are constructed based on either or both, those two ways of knowing, interacting in some way. And I was reflecting on how stories around money are created. People sort of relationship to safety, security. Like whether or not they deserve abundance, there all these codes put in place that might affect one's relationship to money, which is just flow energy. So let's talk a little bit about where some of those stories come from. And as someone who talks a lot about sovereignty, what are ways of engaging with those stories in a way that feels helpful?

Jordan 26:24  
Well, that's great. So obviously right now, we would like to put out there's a big caveat, which is to say that we're having this conversation. And it's just us, and the people commenting on YouTube. I have no sense whatsoever, but vaguely answer the question you're asking in a deeply, richer, whole way. All I can do is maybe nudge a little bit in the direction right. So I will be putting some things out there. Come that makes sense to me and feel meaningful. I am quite certain if this is even a small part. It's only a very small part of that. story. Cool, and each person will have their own. Yeah. So some things that come up as we're talking about money, right? Is that the struggle has are has is implicit in money. There has been money is is, well, so should take this for as part of the story.
And then this is how true the story is. But it is something that is useful. A long time ago, like 100 years ago, and a lot longer. Humans routinely had to deal with the problem of scarcity. Like it was just the nature of life, the nature of life was that we're going to go hungry. In fact, the nature of life is that quite often we go a lot hungry and some of us die of starvation depending on where we were in the the vicissitudes of nature. In fact, if you think about the origin story of humans like the way that we currently tell The story in western science is that we almost didn't make it as a species like we almost died out. And so this notion of how do we actually deal with privation, not just scarcity but privation is deeply fundamental. And the notion that we live in a world where it's at least plausible that people no longer need to go hungry, it's actually a relatively recent idea. You know, up until the middle of the 19th century, it was obvious that some people are going to go without, and some people are going to go and go without a lot and go without lots of things like food and you know, warmth in the in the winter and nice clothes and fill in the blank. And so the money exists in at least in some sense that there's some aspects of this lots of things going on here, but this is some aspects in order to answer the question, who's gonna go without those who have more money don't and those who have less money to do? And then you got the question of how how do you get it? 
How do we allocate the money, but that's actually really important to recognize embedded in the underlying fundamental assumption of money is scarcity. And an embedded in the psychology of scarcity is in fact privation of truly being at the edge, and maybe on the other side of the edge. And this is this makes sense. So when you're touching money, like when you just holding it, you're holding that lineage, you're holding that history and it cannot help but be felt inside you. The moment that I have money is also the moment we become aware of the fact that I might not have money. I think there's even a point in childhood we become aware of this, we become aware of the fact that whatever is coming to you, this has so far been coming to you as a nature family. And your family may or may not have resources, but you don't really know what's the limit, you just know that there's a flow that comes because of relationship. And there's a point in which you become conscious of the fact that there's this other object out there called money. That is the thing that has that implication. So then we have all the stories that are built around that all kinds of Stories, right you've got like, class conflict stories. 
There's a lot right for the past several hundred years, we've had formal efforts to shift the way that we resource and allocate privation we real estate resource and allocate plenitude through formal narrative through manifestos and propaganda, right telling stories that weaponize or or try to create conflict to shift that. And I'm not saying that that's a bad thing. I'm just saying that's the thing that's been out there, and a lot of that stuff, but those stories and the the mimetic vector of those stories, the they were designed to land, they're designed to influence and change behavior. And some of them are told in a very pithy way, and they land aggressively. And by the way, this is true on both sides. So one side might tell a story of you worked really hard, you earned this money and the money that you have is in fact a sign of your virtue. 
And that's a that's a story and that story, protects your readiness and willingness to You make no money. And then there's another story. It says that merely participating in the system of money makes you as complicit in the exploitation of the billions of people who are absolutely harmed in at least some senses by global capitalism is another story. Right? And, and that story makes it very difficult to choose to, to make an old or money, we should recognize, these are both weapons, both of these stories are weapons, they are not there for the purposes of upgrading your sovereignty. They're there for the purposes of influencing your choices for the benefit of somebody other than you. And that's, that's important, right? Because neither one of those ultimately is going to end in a good place. And this is, by the way, I think it's very important to hold this because if you're coming from the lineage that believes the hard work and thrift equals virtue, therefore that story is a story that teaches people how to be good in the world. What I just said if engine makes you angry, because I just told you that story is, in fact a story that ultimately is not in service of you as the individual who's hearing the story. And by the way, not in service of other people, if you're coming from the lineage of capitalism is an exploitive system that you dead treads on the souls and the bodies of the poor. I just told you that that story is also not in the service of you, the poor or the people. It also is going to make you very offended, right? nonetheless, I'm putting it out there as my proposition that all ideologies are bad. ideology is just not the right tool. 
But that's one piece. One piece of this is that we've been fighting ideological wars now for a couple hundred years. And here's the thing, we've also had invited experiences as individuals, and all these stories are based on real actual fucking experiences, right? I've had experiences where I have, you know, aspired to or desired something, and I could not afford it. And the people who could afford it simply dekes it did not seem to be natural virtue flowing to the allocation of what these things are going on. Clearly, this thing is something that should have been near to me, or at least to somebody who I felt was, you know, deeply, deeply virtuous. And the people who are getting it were clearly assholes. Right? There's no question about that. I've worked in businesses where the person who was in charge who drove like, Who was it from the movie office space, was a douche bag, right? And they had all kinds of fancy stuff. 
And so the internal logic of Well, there's something about what's going on in the system and the way that money works and gives people access to making their choices be more influential, that's deeply mismatched with the notion of virtue and the notion of sovereignty and maturity. And I've worked in certain circumstances where myself and my circumstances were never as bad as many. Where I felt like all of my time and energy and life and capacity, vitality was being thrown into waste, absolute waste, and I had no influence over it. And that's real. There's no question that's absolutely real for almost everyone, actually. I would say in fact, for everyone, but we'll skip that part, but certainly for almost everyone, and in many cases, brutally so. So it's not just my my time, but actually literally my life, like whether I'm a coal miner, or I'm, you know, working at what's a good example of what just flat out kills you? Well, it's just going into the third world where I'm working in a machine shop, sweatshop, my life energy, my literal vitality of being alive, the duration that I'll be on this planet and my capacity to have meaningfulness is being completely bled into this machine. Over which I have no control and in fact, is massively more powerful than me and cares about me Not at all, or even sociopathically cares about me only to the degree to which can do precisely what it's doing. That's true. I mean, that's it. That's a true thing. 
Those experiences are then looking for meaning are looking for sense. And so if some stories show up and the stories land, you're like, Oh shit, like, Oh man, I feel terrible about the fact that my choices these fucking shoes that I just bought are actually being, you know, built at the at the life energy in the end the the joy and the possibility of kids in Pakistan. Now I've got a story we're not going to do. I can tell once I can pick some stories to talk about how I'm really justified. And by the way, I can rationalize the buck out of it. Because they didn't have that job I made sure they didn't have that what would they have to be even more impoverished? Or can pick the other stories and try to tell other stories that support the choices that I find myself having to make. And in my the thing that I'm trying to convey is all of that all of that is actually getting in between you and truly being a sovereign being in the world and your capacity to make effective choices in the direction of increasingly supporting the side of other people, ongoing way. And that's the which Lucy was ethics. So that's the proposition that we put out there is almost first order for any choice that you're making. And in the context of what we're talking about here, at least ostensibly, you know, entrepreneurship or wealth creation, same thing, right? If you are being guided by means if you're being guided by malware by narratives that have been constructed by other people for their own purposes, then you're being separated from your capacity to make the most effective choices that you could make.

Collin 36:40  
Hmm, yeah, it seems like what's required is a disciplined practice in perceiving what is, rather than overlaying it with because because overlaying something with a meaning or a story happens unconsciously all the fucking time. Yeah, you like think you're observing reality as it is. And what you're actually doing is, there's some story that's in there that, maybe you developed as a kid to fucking survive in the world, and it's still running your, your programming. And you could just accept that as reality. So like, is it turtles all the way down to really seeing reality truly as it is?

Jordan 37:31  
No, it's the exact opposite, actually. So it's turtles all the way down. If you're trying to run it from the top of the stack, you're trying to run it through propositional knowing is turtles all the way down, which is to say that it's kind of a paradox because you'll never get there. If you're doing it to the bottom up, from the ground up through participatory knowing they're already there. Like you're always already there. There's nothing nothing separating you but yourself. And it was a point when you were a kid before that story was in your head and guess what before was in your head, it wasn't and you were directly in relationship with what is You may not have been replaced with what is with aesthetic discernment. You may have had a lack of skillfulness, and how to be able to sense the possibility of what is presented and have a skillfulness in your own way to respond to it to be able to further choices in that context. And that's a different thing. But your capacity to be in relationship with what is unmediated by narrative with media, media by ideology is fundamental. Its prime is primordial. It's the base case. And so you can always go there, well, that you can always kind of reset to that it's not trivial, but it can be done.

Collin 38:36  
This is making me think of something you brought up in some thread on Twitter, where people were talking about Game B principles, and then this sort of meme of transition became up as like transition bees were exploratory actions can sort of take place in a transitional period between Game A, Game B, sort of make sense conceptually. And one of the things that you were talking about was Feeling drawn to high leverage spaces and collaborating with people on projects that could be hugely influential in the future and currently, and immature boys was one of the phrases that came up.

Jordan 39:22  
I mean, I'm an amateur boy. Less so, day by day, but nonetheless yeah, vastly too much.

Collin 39:34  
Can you talk about what you meant by that, unpack that idea a little more?

Jordan 39:39  
Yeah. Okay. can just hold me to that and bring me back to it. But there's something that in what you were saying that I wanted to pop out because it felt like it was pretty important. Yes, right. Because so the branch that brought us here was the notion of I conveyed that my own personal orientation tended to be towards these kinds of high leverage projects. And what I wanted to highlight was the right choice for a given individual, say, for example, yourself has to be coming from your particularity, from your singularity, as a being in the world. So, what is the right choice for me isn't necessarily, or even in any meaningful way connected to the right choice for you, it may be that your vocation, your way of simultaneously creating wealth, and to some extent, you have to. You have to eat and also of being most fully in service to gain be that thing which we yearned to actually have come into the world is local to you. Right? So there's very little that I can say about my own personal experience that should be considered as a guide of best practices. 
That's not good two degrees which are able to get a sense of me and how minus shows up and why I end up going in this direction. And then you can say, Well, okay, well now there is no Who am I, as my mind is show up, like if it turns out that your particular vocation was closely aligns to wealth creation and gain a running a b&b? 
Then do that, like that is perfect. If it's growing your own food, do that if it's running a hedge fund, okay, give it a shot like I it's, it's gonna have to be again a stetic discernment, but get a sense, get a sensing increasingly become sophisticated and being able to actually use that sense to guide your choices about who you are, and what it is about your thrown this into the world that seems to lead to where you particularly should be playing. Like, what is your piece of the puzzle to be holding, that you are uniquely qualified to hold? Right. So that's, I just want to make sure that was out there. So then, in my experience, and I think there's a conversion reason for why Low EQ or hampered EQ, males tend to be the ones that I was running into. And that's because developmentally an orientation towards very rapid the high IQ, rapid turning of gears in strategy space, meaning in the objective movement of objective forces to achieve desired goals, like chess. One of the things that's very noticeable about chess, is that having empathy with the chess pieces does not help you in any way.

Collin 42:43  
That makes sense.

Jordan 42:45  
Like really, really caring about the interior perspective of the knight is actually going to make you the worst chess player. If you are extremely good at being entirely focused on the objective situation, holding it in enormous amount of information in your head about what's going on and being able to very rapidly select the right choice strategically to be a good chess player.
Well, it turns out that in the world that we live in a lot of stuff that's like that, there's a lot of stuff were not actually having any meaningful amount of empathy for the pieces that you're moving around with. Now, it turns out to be people, sometimes known as employees or members of the political movement you happen to be leading and having a very surgical focus on maximally maximally strategically positioning, you might call it the energetic domain may be energetic domain. I mean, like the like in military terms, finding the weak point and enemy lines and then surging your forces to the enemy lines and then getting behind that, like that's a that's what I'm talking about. That's how you win. So if you're talking about military strategy, you're also talking about business strategy in the the metaphors float. Back and forth very easily. And you're also talking about, like, disruptive venture strategy. 
If I want to disrupt the educational system, there's a whole set of characteristics and trainings that make me just better at it than other people in the domain of strategy, and particularly the domain of strategy around technology, because probably the strategy around technology, I need to be able to grasp technology very deeply, which means I need to be able to hold, like lots of stuff in my head. So I need to be really smart, like really smart. And I need to have done something developmentally that put a lot of this information in my head. And also not be a scientist because that's the scientist is like, really smart me understand science and technology at to have this other characteristic, which is that I actually have strategy as part of my modus operandi. Something that I'm motivated to deploy in the world that I've actually spent lifetime life energy on developing capacity. So that's me, like I just described myself like that's and then by the way, just to add one third piece to it because it As as growing up things like go playing games in science fiction, comic books are a big part of my developmental environment, the notion that the world is very much made up, and we can we can choose to just make up a different story. And if we can make that story more real than it is, was again part of my developmental environment. Okay, well, only a certain set of characteristics that are going to select for people who are going to be successful in any niche that has those as the constraints.
Most of them look like, you know, Elon Musk, our arcs have a lot of similarity to him, including failed marriages. And Silicon Valley is littered with these kinds of kids because Silicon Valley figured out that that particular topology fits a particular niche. Back in the early days of Silicon Valley, they're like, they remember they were like coming out of world war two and recognizing that there was something about technology that was important and powerful, and trying to figure out like, Okay, how do we do this better? With like IBM was the East Coast, you know archetype to come over to the west coast and to start experimenting with different approaches on how to actually do this technology innovation thing. And he started getting these archetypes where I just don't use Steve Jobs as an example, it's a little bit late in the curve. And and that's a really good example of a particular kind of person who had the skills, these capacities and the capacity to, to have this vast imaginal space of all the possibilities of what technologies could be combined into to create a particular effect. In his case, he had kind of a design marketing version of it. So he was seeing it from the point of view of something to be sexy that other people do interesting again, because as a kid, he had a lot of con men experience and grifter experience. 
So that was part of his developmental skill set. But you know, was the Act was his key partner in crime. In the beginning there was Nick was coming at it from more of the kind of the systems design and seeing how these things are possible. And Silicon Valley is like, oh, wow, okay, I get it. These kind of really Weird, low EQ, like when I'm talking to them, I'm not even getting the facial expressions that indicate that they're human being Sometimes kids, they're the ones who are the peak predator in this niche. Okay, cool. I need optimize for that I need to get more find a way to, to make them more effective. So how do I put them in constructs that either incentivize them to do things that they don't want like to do naturally, they have to like talk to other people, and work with people who have collaborative skill sets and all this stuff. Like it figured out how to create a construct that super empowered these particular individuals. 
So that's what I was saying is that in the things that I've found myself attracted to, and frankly, still attracted to, because if I can earn this weird capacity through all kinds of tragedy and sacrifice on my own part, and the people who I care about, and it'd be nice able to put it to use so the capacity to see vast complex systems and see all the pieces fit together and to notice how subtle shifts in science can be shifted in technologies that can disrupt certain things. characteristics of the system to shiftings in a big way, is attractive to me because I can do it and it'd be nice to believe that it's useful. But in any event, what I do if I go into that space is that I find myself a whole lot of other folks who are somewhat similarly disabled. And I noticed that particularly over the past decade and a half, unless you're playing the Silicon Valley game straight down the middle, so unless you like building Uber, or Facebook, or Snapchat, that particular topology is new is not actually the right typology for building this next kind of thing. It throws too many errors, it can't collaborate anywhere near as well, as is necessary to build game B, for example. So that's what I was trying to say that Twitter that you know, 50 cent of like nine characters.

Collin 49:56  
If you consider the different functions of money unit of exchange store value fungible, etc. does not need all of these features anymore. We have computers for trust. That's just a little snippet. Is anything interesting in there that you want to adress? 

Jordan 50:20
Yeah, sure, let's pop that open. And so it took me a while to actually process it because a lot of that I've been thinking about for a long time, so I just need to think, okay, what's maybe obvious to me, but isn't that not common knowledge? So the first piece is to recognize that the thing that we call money has a bundle of functions that it tends to bundle together. So it bundles things like unit of account. And it bundles things like medium of exchange, and store values and things that in economics is the way they talk about it. As you mentioned some other ones, by the way, just as long as we're at it, because because the the key the key thing of what about to say is we can we can decouple, we can we can unbundle these things Think about them as not necessarily having to be part of the same construct. As you mentioned, by the way, that at a meta level in terms of ethics, bundling and unbundling is a massive consideration. The notion, for example that we bundle, which one we were talking about, and this is maybe a little bit challenging, but the way that recently in California getting vaccines and going to school have been bundled, is an ethical quandary. Because those don't naturally belong together. Like there's no reason for them to be together other than the fact that because people want to go to school, if we bundle vaccines with school now vaccines is up regulated. 
But the same thing happens like with cable companies build, you know, if you want to get ESPN, you also have to get Disney or whatever. If you want to get internet you have to pay for TV like bundling things to its enormous amounts of ethical quandary because it takes people's choices away. So maybe that's even part of the implication here is that because money has has bundles lots of things together. They don't necessarily need to be bundled. It creates an ethical quandary because it takes people's choices away. And maybe we're now in a moment where we can begin to unbundle it in more and more ethical, which is a more choice enhancing ways. So the other things that I was going to mention that are bundled are if you look at the way that we do we use money in, in the economy. It does a bunch of different things simultaneously. And this is a big reason why we've kind of get selected for as a convergent attractor. So the price gives me an orientation towards where I might orient my or spend my time. 
So if I look at say, wages as a price signal, the price signal that job which will pay me the most money and that I can get maybe is the best thing that I should be doing the most value that I can actually contribute to the economy. By hypothesis is that job which will pay me the most money and that I can also get I can qualify for. So the the price signal helps us orient our time and attention towards those those activities that are most valuable. That's really, really important, like super hard, like at this very moment what conversation I'd be having. I'm talking with you, is this the right one, are you and I actually spending our time optimally? What economics would say is that if we had a price signal, every single choice that we made was guided by a price signal. I could just look out there and have like a bunch of bid ask markets for my particular podcast time, whichever bid asked market had the highest price, by definition be the place where I'm giving them as everybody's paying for the minutes of podcasts, and that's the ones most important. So that's one piece, right? That's one piece. And it's it's super powerful because it's simple, yet universal, meaning whether it's talking in a podcast or making an asparagus and whether it's me or if somebody in Zimbabwe, the price signal can kind of flow through all those things. But it also does things like orient.
It's actually how we go about allocating resources. So not just how do we personally, like how do I get my choices activated out in the world is also through money. So I am oriented towards how I choose to attend my time and energy, what work will I do to give value to the whole, but also, I'm telling the whole what value I want them to give me. And these two things match. So if I've got you $10, I put those $10 on a new iPhone, then the entire economy is like, iPhones are better, let's be doing more of that. But $10 on orange, that's the entire economy shifts to oranges, right? And more importantly, in terms of ethics, if I say I want a is it organic orange as opposed to a pesticide orange then in principle that signal percolates out and there's some shift in the whole choice field towards slightly more organic ish. This is a lot of noise in the total attenuated signal, then it's also incentive. It's not just orientations incentive motivation, like well, you know, okay, the entire value field is telling me that I should be a doctor. That's the payment the most money and that I can get I can qualify for. But I don't want to be a doctor being a doctor sucks, right? But nope, that's your motivation, your incentive. And here's the trade off, do something that you think sucks you are interested in, make a lot of money. And then you get more choice making to get the things that you want. It's that little loop right there. Which of course, we're all familiar with that trade off, I'll go be an investment banker, do really bad things, make a lot of money and then get whatever I want, which tends to also be interesting enough vapid and not fulfilling.
Then we got another one, which is really interesting at a higher level, we had this hypothesis that the collected allocation of resources that are being created by this bilateral relationship between where I'm orienting my time and attention by the price signal and How I'm getting what I want creating price signals to demand puts choice making coming back to the beginning of the conversation differentially in the hands of the people who are the best at getting us what we want entrepreneurs in the middle, right? So if I'm making oranges and you're making oranges, and either I'm able to make them cheaper or able to make them let's say organic better, and the market wants oranges and I'm either making them cheaper or better or some combination thereof, I'm making more money and either getting more demand or my cost basis is lower. So more money is accruing to me on satisfying global need more more values being produced, and therefore I get more choice making. So remember I had just two things that are bundled here one is my incentive for doing the thing that the market wants. The maybe I'd more Mayor mayor, not one is that I have more choices. keen to further my own interests, this is a separate one. This is because I have now proven to be fucking effective, I should be given more choices, because then I can steer our collective resource allocation more effectively. And I can say, okay, but gasoline and electric cars, I've got a lot of money now. So I can choose to put 100 million dollars of my own money into it and jumpstart this. And to some extent, that's true. To some extent, the people who are effective at x producing origins may also be globally effective at other things. But of course, the sentence it's also not true. Just because you're a really good investment banker doesn't mean new jack should have education. And yet, you have generic universal choice making capacity through this token, and called money. And if you choose to put your mind towards funding research, or funding nonprofits or funding private schools, or a perhaps do an education, your choices begin to go in that direction. You can kind of like launder investment banking expertise, into education expertise, without having any of the thing on the right and haven't cleaned anything on the left. So that's a lot of words. But it's actually I think an important thing to have in your mind, which is money bundles a lot of things together.
On the one hand, because it does that it's extremely capable of producing certain kinds of efficiencies and effects. It's highly competitive against other signaling mechanisms. On the other hand, because it bundles all those things together, you get a lot of stuff but don't necessarily don't necessarily, actually well handled, stuck together, and it's really hard to pull them apart because they're part of this important powerful system. As our interlocutor noted, we now live in a world where information is super easy. When signal is being sent through face to face conversation, the rare teletype and maybe letters. Money is insanely more powerful than any other possible signaling mechanism for propagating information to the social field. When everybody's 24 seven unfortunately, connected with mobile giant computers, we can produce as many signals as we'd like up to your ear. Literally the limits of your Your attention. So we can imagine a system where we begin to have a very large number of other kinds of signals. The folks at the meta currency project was, I think, remarkably poor marketing acumen called them current sees, seeing currents, to replace currency, different kinds of currencies that signal different things differently to more fully actually help us make sense of those values, as opposed to all these things that are bundled together. So, yes, by the way, challenging, it's not obvious exactly how you do that. And most efforts in that direction have largely Well, most efforts in the direction of unseating money have largely failed. 
Let me give you some simple obvious examples of things of this sort that are sort of obviously successful. Amazon and Yelp ratings. So I'm trying to find out how to most fully satisfy my desire to have a really good book or have a good meal a good cup of coffee. Well, one mechanism might might use as the price signal I might look for the most expensive book, or the most expensive book that I can afford looking as, okay, this books $30, I've only want to spend 2020 go, that's the price signal trying to help me orient my time and attention efficiently. But of course, that's kind of a shitty signal. It's true, it's obviously terrible. So Amazon's signal of ratings and reviews, radically increases my capacity to process that information space. And you might notice really shifts the price signal. So if I have a book that's trying to sell itself for 30 bucks, and there's another book that sort of roughly in the same domain, so they're comparable, and one's a one star, one's a five star, the one star is not going to sell it all zero. Everyone's five stars gonna sell and take all demand. So the price signal something is shifted in this one either just goes away, or the price has to go down. More more clearly the casing Yep. So they've got five coffee shops. And one of the coffee shops has five stars and each one has like going down. Coffee shop with three stars. If it's treated, charging exactly the same price is going to be getting much less sales. 
So this is actually completely different information. signaling mechanism a currency, in this case in the form of a review or a star rating, that is not money and meaningfully changes our capacity to make effective choices and getting our, our, our needs fulfilled. And by the way, also has direct, real measurable implications for the price signal affecting money. So we can be very, very clever about that we can begin to think about modulating different forms of currencies, including, by the way different forms of money that have different design characteristics. And then the, the altcoin universe played with a bunch of different ones. And there's, you know, hundreds of millions of other variations and see what kinds of consequences those have.

Collin 1:01:43  
Another question that I wanted to ask you, someone threw it on the group was like if the Silicon Valley personality disposition you described earlier that is the peak predator. And in the tech space, what are some of the qualities you see essential and somebody who has an entrepreneurial mindset, who is also interested in sense making and transitioning into game B? What are some of those qualities that are actually become the peak predator in this new space? 
Jordan 1:02:20
Well, in that case that the metaphor peak predator feels a little off. And I think that's one characteristic. Yeah, the notion of something feels off like a basic orientation towards these qualities of feeling. This aesthetic discernment is an orientation towards aesthetic discernment, meaning, a basal capacity to attend to building skillfulness and using that modality to make choices that would be a primary characteristic, because this particular modality is increasingly meaningful, increasingly important, for example, in navigating complexity. Do you want to navigate complexity using analytical reasoning, you're going to have a very bad day. If you want to integrate complexity using aesthetic discernment have a much better day. By the way, it's still not gonna be an awesome day because complexity is complex, but it's gonna be a much better. Here's another one. I called this and I don't think it really landed, I call it infinitesimal courage. So the story there was something like an inquiry into the nature of courage itself, were discouraged. And one of the things that I noticed was that, at least I propose that who knows if this is even been vaguely valid, but I propose that courage was simply a simple acceptation of the fact that it was discovered in the evolutionary arc, that adults parents who put themselves at physical first person risk oftentimes would have, the children would survive, right. So the sort of the mama bear protecting your cubs. The instinct to be willing to put yourself at the First Person risk leading to net net positive consequences for your genome becomes an underlying capacity that can be exempted, meaning taken away and put into a different context. 
Where okay, well now I'm not protecting my genome, I'm protecting my tribe. Okay, well, tribes that had courage more people had courage, radically out competed tribes that didn't have courage. So okay becomes even more further embedded, both now by the way, genetic, deep, deep disposition predisposition multiplied by cultural reinforcement, we're telling lots of stories about heroes who sacrifice themselves to the greater good. But then it can be exactly for my tribe to my nation. There's no French tribe. But Napoleon did a great job of creating this meta story, this narrative this ideology that there's a French nation and once again exactly career so I'm willing to now just charge at a whole bunch of people throwing Let it be really fast. In Defense of this thing, right again, the genetic predisposition of the mama bear protecting your cubs multiplied by culture creates this thing encourages very powerful those those groups We're fully capable of up regulating courage, mostly in young males, clearly had been more successful over historical time. But what's interesting about it that I was thinking about was it's almost exclusively very narrow band, which is the your willingness to subject yourself to meaningful harm and damage from the outside. And you put yourself in front of things that could create physical or mental emotional harm to you, when you're protecting something with your left your body. But the interior side tends to be completely not present in Kurt. Right. So for example, the, I think, relatively ubiquitous. 
And I think with this, but the roads are the complete story of say, a truly truly courageous soldier who kills himself, because he's, he's, he's gay. Gay is not received well received in the 30s and 40s in the military, and he can't you know, deal with that in his interior. And he never chooses to, you know, find a way to process this is that you know that story, or fill in the blank, it doesn't matter. There's many, many, many things. So what happens is that courage is very outward facing, we find that actually most of the things that we have to overcome, particularly now, particularly this new story, or inward facing, and old school courage doesn't help us at all. In fact, it helps us zero maybe even minus, it distracts us, we can create an enemy out there that we can, you know, gear up for old school courage to go out and combat precisely to distract ourselves from actually dealing with the enemy in here. So infinitesimal courage was this particular changing of habits from aversion to curiosity. So something comes up that makes you have some experience. What's it called? micro aggression yet, you experience a micro aggression and you are micro triggered. Now you got brush brothers Two possible responses. One would be an aversion response that is a bad thing I'm going to avoid it euro avoid the person or I will create some kind of protection mechanism or possibility to just dilute it and repress my own experience.
Those are all version responses or I can have a curiosity response. I can be like okay, something just happened here some signal is happening in my environment. I'm going to be curious what the hell is going on and I must be oriented towards it not to go into it reckless because it might be too dangerous but to pay attention without a reaction right not not to push back or protect or delete whatever happens to be but actually like what's this all about? actually become more open more perceptive, slow down, fan open your receivers and your sense making a break down your ideological presuppositions that project what must be the case already? Oh, this is other. This is just a bad guy. I had a conversation at a coffee shop recently. He was younger than me, but I don't know how old exactly. And he gave me some really interesting insight into the experience. I guess folks who are probably, you know, millennials and Gen Z, that people who grew up very much in this digital field, digital natives because he was noticing that there was an almost instantaneous AI grouping trigger, that a huge amount of social experience was very quickly endeavouring to sense whether the internet the person you're interacting with is in group or out group. And after he told me that I start paying attention, I noticed, this actually does seem to be the case, like you're talking about the petty things that are going on Twitter. A lot of that seems to be well explained by people protecting themselves. And then sending signals out into the world that are designed to identify whether or not the people they're interacting with are in group or out group. And on the one hand, this is really quite challenging that that creates an enormous inability to communicate because that notion of in group and out group is already that just forms micro tribes, you're not you very quickly devolved into a balkanization to micro tribes and non generated micro tribes. If I identify everything that is signaling negative as out group, then all I have is a very homogeneous in group and evaporate pretty quickly. But the increase to why like how did you get there? It's actually quite interesting. And it's and I think that it speaks to this capacity or this competence in infinitesimal courage or speaks to the need for it, which is to be able to shift your habit from a habit of reactive we enforcement of what may or may not be an interior that actually serves you more fully, and shift that habit towards curiosity where you can actually be more. 
And of course, this is all part of sovereignty, you can be more able to be aware of more thoughtful about making choices about how you want to respond to this phenomenon, and then choose those that actually do serve, which may take some time to suss out. So, aesthetic discernment, and infinitesimal courage are two characteristics that came up. Another one was, I've told this one in the language of information theory, in terms of signal, discernment, General signal up regulation and down regulations. There's like two movements. One is like right now as you're listening to me spew nonsense out of my mouth. To what degree are you able to just separate the signal from the noise? Like, if you're rejecting what I'm saying, because some of its noise, then you're wasting everybody's time. You're rejecting what I'm saying, because some of this noise and then you actually take the time to write that down on you, you're wasting even more time. But if you're able to say, Okay, look, nobody's going to be telling the whole truth. In fact, almost everybody's full of bullshit a lot, because it's hard not to be full of bullshit. I'm going to listen. And I'm just going to throw away the parts that are noise and take the parts that have signal. And that's that that's just how these relationships work, right? So that that's the three levels that I just went through, right? One level is not to be so fully reactive, you actually waste your own time reacting and then expressing your reaction. Not to be reactive. But then to actually just learn that that's just you. 
That's just the world we're in your world where you need to learn how to listen and pull that signal, which is the thing that is nutritive for you throw away the noise and then and that's the first first move. And then the second is, then how do you bring more signal back into the world and I may not be in this conversation. Maybe in this conversation. You hear what I'm saying? You like okay, Jordan, like 85% we just said it's bullshit, but it's 15% sounds pretty good. Let's, let's focus on that and up regulate that and get that to like 45%. Can we do that? And here's how I'm going to try to contribute, right? So you're now using your discernment in expression and adding something back into the conversation, which makes the conversation even richer for us, and they anybody else who perceives it, or you might just bring it into your other conversations can be anywhere, right? You're bringing that signal back into the world isn't matter exactly where it is, as long as it is, and increasing the overall signal in the world. But I was talking to a woman, I think Romanian descent who now lives in Germany, named Alex, Alex s, I think is what she told me to call her, or how to name her. And she was telling me about a ritual that she loved when she was a child. I think it's part of the Orthodox religion and Eastern and the way that it worked was I don't, I'm just gonna tell the story the way I have probably embellished it, so I'm probably not telling you the truth. I'm telling you. A story that landed for me that is largely based upon what she actually told me. 

Collin 1:13:02  
It's okay, I'll toss out the bullshit.

Jordan 1:13:04  
Exactly. Perfect. Now we're playing, we're playing together. So midnight on Easter, the lights are out, it's dark. candles are lit at churches. People come with candles, unlit candles, they come to the church, they light their candle, they come out of the church, they walk down the street, if you encounter somebody on the street with an unlit candle, you have a lit candle, it is sort of the thing to do to light their candle with your candle. So in the beginning, the source of light is that the church. Very quickly, the overwhelming source of light is just people in your community who are walking through the streets. And if you just by the way, do the math on this, it's going to be a very steep exponential curve. So for a while there's only a few people who have walked into churches with their candles were walking out. But as they encounter somebody with a only candle and they light it, the number of lit candles begins to increase the probability that on the candle and camera lit candle increases, and you get an explosion. And now the whole town is lit by these candles of relationships that people actually encountering each other. And then you think about the metaphor, because the signal noise metaphor is very similar to the light heat metaphor in thermodynamics. So, one thing is to become in yourself so now I'm using the metaphor, the this capacity that we're exploring it to become a candle, meaning become an object that when exposed to heat, can become light can produce light. Don't be a wet a green stick, right where I can put a lot of heat on you and nothing comes out except for maybe accurate smoke. Don't do that. 
Become a candle or just not too much heat, combustion light, and by the way, gives off more heat. So now what happens is become candle is one thing, then seek the light. As you're walking around, you become candle and you seek the light. Seek the light, find the light when you find the light, come close enough to the light that you yourself that become a source of light. When you're a source of light, share that light. As you see other people who are becoming candle share whatever light you have, which actually means also sharing heat to help them combust, but it's through the signals light to attract you able to perceive that relationship. At the end of the day, you don't want you don't want to melt their candle, you don't want to like hold your candle near their candles or just melts, you actually want to turn that heat into light and light in them. And if enough people become candles, and let people see the light, and let people share the light skillfully, then you get an explosion, an exponential explosion that starts slow. But maybe in certain locations, certain individuals or places or places where the first candles are lit. But eventually more and more and more of the candles are actually happening from the community. And then it becomes everyone.

Collin 1:15:48  
Hmm, are you just trying to get me to accept Jesus Christ as my Lord and Savior?

Jordan 1:15:55  
If you will decide Orthodoxy is your thing, then definitely you should do that. It'd be a very weird choice to become Eastern Orthodox and not accept Jesus Christ. But I imagine there are other metaphors that can be employed.

Collin 1:16:05  
That's beautiful. One other thing that I want to ask you, well, how much time do you have? Okay, 10 more minutes. Generative collectives. What did you say, generative tribes. One of the things you were saying about social media was people constantly signaling in group.

Jordan 1:16:30
Oh, non-generative tribes is actually what I said, and so the inverse of that would be a generative tribe. 

Collin 1:16:40
Yeah, I wanna point to the inverse of it. So okay. I've been thinking a lot about like, what makes up a generative tribe and yeah, and like wanting to outsource an experiment in creating a tribe that is generative in nature. And I don't know what that looks like it. I'm hovering around that idea, and I wonder if you have any thoughts about?

Jordan 1:17:11  
Boy, do I. 

Collin 1:17:12
It's a huge topic. And it's going to depend on like, this particular tribe's disposition, what their work is in the world. But just in the spirit of like, shining a light in that direction. Do you have any ideas of of groups that are doing something something like this? Or maybe just your own thoughts of how you could see that being a potentially valuable exercise? I know that's a huge question.

Jordan 1:17:42  
When you say groups or doing something like this, what is this that you're pointing at?

Collin 1:17:47  
I think it's like tribes that are groups that are experimenting with with collective coherence, so maybe, maybe it's a start up, maybe. These groups experimenting with generativity. 

Jordan 1:18:00
So at least they're conscious. They're consciously aware of the possibility and maybe importance of we might call technologies of generativity in what they are doing. And they may, they may be just that maybe all they're doing was just do that. Or they may be saying we're going to do X, but while we're doing extra girls can be mindful of this. There's an increasingly large number. And what's interesting, actually, now that I think about it, is that they seem to come from a number of different qualitative. Right, well, different kinds of approaches to addressing that problem. So I'll give you an example. One approach we might think of as being architectural. So I was talking to him, this researcher I think, he's working on a project called World brain, of which one piece is called mimicks. So they're looking at it from the point of view of how do we generate an information architecture, a technical tool, like Wikipedia is a technical tool, that by its nature, the way that it's physically designed, up regulates the generativity of anybody who uses it. That's one example. By the way, it's very important, very important example, that sounds like we said to me that we use sure our expressive capacity in certain ways and don't sort of another way as well, one of the things we can use is design, we can design or redesign the tools that we use to up regulate our generative capacity. 
So in this case, what happens is this piece This approach has it has the advantage of scale. In some sense, everybody on the planet could use this tool. And so everybody in the planet would then be participating in some level in a meta generative meta drive. So that's one approach. As another approach, I actually participated in A, I guess a project or a gathering, I think that the the overall project headlines called Jubilee, and they were using a kind of sacred technology from the indigenous peoples of North America called circle practice or circle talking. It's not it's not guys, it's like circling. It's more like a language. So there's a very specific tournament, but no, there was anyway, a circle people talking and particular characteristics exactly how it works. And what you do with your prep is we're called called upon. And they were bringing the inquiry of endeavor to actually do the work of healing the primordial wound of science, which involves first the inquiry of what is that primordial wound. And maybe maybe just getting to the bottom of it isn't healing. And what they brought together was a quite diverse group of individuals, one of which was me, as well as individuals who are representing different indigenous groups and different cultures that were participating in this circle in Oakland and then there will be others in different locations using the same sacred technology and certain crossover participants. 
And there was a very distinct awareness both in the circle and then after by on the part of this group of this of the secret technology itself, like the technology the capacities and Okay, you know, we've got like a, you know, a Western scientists from just straight down the middle on in this group, and then we've got, you know, an in person from indigenous nation that, Dan a lot of epistemological and historical and emotional distance between them. How can we actually have a generative conversation? these are these are actually two very concrete tribes that are quite distinct and oftentimes don't get along can't enough times. In fact, epistemological II can't communicate. And I remember actually a particular story where it was a just spoken as obvious that We're all part of the same human family because we all started in Africa. And the indigenous guys, like, I don't know about you, but my people came out of a hole in the ground near the river. You just tried to impose an epistemology on me about the nature of reality that I took, except that's not my epistemology, man. So, like, Whoa, okay, so that's and to try to resolve that gradient was an effort of this particular sacred technology and people participating in this is a lot, a lot of that, you know, like guys, since talks work on certainly practice his efforts to figure out how to actually generate relationality dynamics that change the way that we're actually able to have kinds of conversations. 
I'm actually beginning a project with guy and john DeBakey. And Chris, I don't know exactly how it's going to play out. But the four of us just started having a conversation of being more self aware, like being more intentional about trying to do exactly that kind of thing. At a meta level, what I would say is that the there's like a set of basic characteristics that will give you the generativity of a of a tribe of a gathering of human beings. These are like the design constraints and they're actually constraints and they have tensions. So I mentioned one earlier, like homogeneity versus heterogeneity, or diversity versus sameness. So, a fully homogeneous group has a very low generativity, essentially, the collapse was the single point. If you and I believe exactly the same thing, there is no difference between us We are the same person. And it's not that we're not generative, like our dialogue, not helpful. It's just some of us will be dialogue with myself, I'm closer to myself to the degree to which you and I have diverse perspectives. The possibility is larger and then this generativity is some something. 
But of course, as the diversity increases, then you have the problem of actually communicating a lot of space we have to traverse if you speak, cling on, and I only speak through a language of light signals and you're blind. We're gonna have a really hard time communicating a huge diversity of perspective, but the diversity is so large that the actual is the of that possibility is essentially zero. So you're actually solving for two different constraints, you need to have enough diversity of perspective, the possibility space is large. But you have to have enough sameness, that the actualization of that possibility is real. And those are the two constraints you need to have. And then in between those two, now you have your psycho technologies, or your sacred technologies, your associate technology, depending on what you like to do, which are precisely about enabling the shifting of that gradient. So a wide variety of different kinds of psycho technologies can up regulate the capacity to process different things that get in the way of communication. So I'm going to go in the direction of language, Google Translate, help somebody who speaks French speak somebody who speaks English to greater or lesser extent, they have a lot better than not having heard. All right, so that's a socio technology that allows now me who speaks English to have a much larger capacity to actualize the possibility of the conversation with somebody who's only fluent in French and the possibility between us as Might be quite large, there's something about languages, that's real. And this is kind of a neat thing, circling practice.
Since doc stuff really helps with people, when you've got trauma between people, where the relationality is an issue, just the sheer ability to be in relationship at all is an issue. And it creates a container where we're actually exploring what's going on in our relationship is almost a primary inquiry. And that dramatically increases the possibility of at least knowing what's happening, and then maybe being able to address it in an increasingly mature and effective fashion. And then we can actually potentially have generative conversations outside of that, and it may be the only generatively we want into our need is relational because that may be the thing that we're trying to deal with.
There's lots of the spaces absurdly enormous, but broadly speaking, I'd say it's there's three primary characteristics. One is sovereignty. So this is your capacity as an individual to more and more and more be able to be in relationship with reality which includes other people. The second is the set of sex technologies that are associated with increasing the capacity to move from the possibility of a conversation into sexuality through the complexity of whatever happens through the characteristics of the conversation. And then the third is the actual conversations, who's talking to who? And what it what is the wisdom, with the thing that's bringing people into place? What is the discernment that is allowing people to choose exactly where they're going to put their time and attention in which combination of possible conversations they can be having. As I mentioned, by the way, you can actually do a nine dimensional that takes each one of these three and feeds them through the others. So that nine dimensions probably a meta construct, but that's probably pushing it too far.

Collin 1:26:44  
Damn, man, this has been a really great conversation. I know I was gonna go, and it went into some really interesting places.

Jordan 1:26:53  
Yeah, it feels like this is a whole bunch of stuff that I don't believe that I've said or talked about, outside of more private context, so I'm interested to see if it lands. This felt like a really nice conversation. I quite enjoyed the where we went, even though it seems like maybe we went off script quite a bit. It's neat and true to see what happens. I'm also intrigued to see if anything happens, like what was going on with the chat?

Collin 1:27:18  
Yeah, there's a live stream and people have been talking. I've just been noticing that, like, this is the first time I've done it. And when I would try and look to see like, what was being generated in the chat room, I would lose the thread of what you were on about, so I felt like I was being pulled, and so I wonder if you need a third person? If the group has any ideas of what that might look like, and how to have more engagement with the chat room, maybe there's a third person that like, will throw up a question on the screen.

Jordan 1:27:50  
No, he third person is watching the chat room, and he's basically sitting outside the meta conversation. Yeah, and feeling was happening between us here but also feeling happening there is able to actually say, Okay, here's the thing that's actually getting the most real energy. Let me know that come like a director or a conductor with an orchestra. Yeah, I was like directing the flow.

Collin 1:28:10  
Yes, yes, exactly. Okay, I'll look into that. I want to make this a weekly thing if possible. And just like with different guests, and it helps hold me more accountable with this project.

Jordan 1:28:24  
It's good to know yourself, okay. holding yourself accountable publicly will help you lose weight, quit smoking, and make podcasts.

Collin 1:28:30  
Fuck yea. Okay thanks, Jordan.