Jordan 0:05  
Could you talk a bit about your personal background, your personal history, and how it relates to the war on sense making and the models that you've constructed to understand the world over the last sort of 20 years or so, it if you if you notice that what we're engaging is a very interesting inquiry, because we're attempting to do sense making about sense making. And for me with that ends up always doing is creating many different layers of awareness of what's happening. So even trying to figure out how to tell the story of how my personal history leads to the inquiry into sense making is of course making sense of my story.
But broadly speaking, it shows up as I was born in 1971, in Texas, and my father was in the military. But we didn't move around too much. And my mom was college educated went on to a career in psychology and education and ultimate politics. And for me, there's if you know anything about the culture of Texas in the 70s, just assume that's if you watch the movie, boyhood, or dazed and confused, just assume that that's the context. And then later on the fact that I was participating in boy nerd culture in that time. So comic books, science fiction, fantasy, really OCD level of pop culture, film and TV, computer computers and role playing games. And again, pretty obsessively like A lot. And so this is impresses itself upon my psychology, lots of different kinds of artifacts things like not just the the notion of say the way that a person who grew up playing chess thinks about life in the model or the framework of chess, but actually growing up playing every game. And thinking about the meta structure that gives rise to games intuitively, and how you can drop into any game and be able to derive what it is. And I guess kids these days are already there. Naturally, think about it. Like the idea of calling a game of First Person Shooter or calling it a sandbox game has become part of the content, conventional language. But back then those concepts didn't exist. So for me, they were built at the level of intuition. But then also things like roleplay, where the notion that the world that you lived in the narrative structures that gave rise to the way that you made sense of a meaning in your world, were actually objects of creative participation, and not just a role playing game, but all of So having to figure out how to spontaneously create a 1920s simulator, and how to create a medieval Japan simulator, and how to create a simulator of contemporary New York but with different changes, different natures reality was, again, just part of my developmental environment. And I guess you'd add to that the experience, which I don't think is that a typical, but my particular experience of not being able to play the game that was handed to me, fluidly. So the game of going to school, mostly go to school, right, as soon as you show up at at, I guess, first grade was when I first started beginning to recognize that there was something definitely off. 
Initially simple things like the idea that there's an authority doesn't actually have the capacity that they're supposed to have, like they're teaching things that are in fact actually wrong. And you can tell that as a first grader, my case a second grader, and then the notion of having to deal with an arbitrary authority that you didn't sign up for, but nonetheless has coercive capacity to force you to do things that clearly suck and by the way, are stupid. So that idea that feeling of trying to figure out like What the hell's going on here, in a sense of constraint. But so the the official game, the official story didn't fit. And my developmental environment was teaching me that. These things these kinds of stories are in fact, creative acts, they aren't just the laws of nature. Put me on a journey of trying to figure figure it out, and figure it out, always in a combo between lessons with my called sense making and agency, never just one or the other, always thinking, Okay, how do we figure out what's happening and how do we have agency in what's happening? And if we sort of fast forward to college, this put me in a place where, for example, I didn't really have any friends. Particular notion of a major, because that's just a story. And it's not a story that worked for it I was trying to accomplish. So I just hacked that. It was nice that the concept of hacking had become somewhat meaningful in that timeframe. And I had participated in hacker culture so broad, like broadly applying the hacker ethos to whatever happened to be there. You're in relationship with the power structure that's stronger than you. But if you can use a combination of cleverness and elegance, you can figure out how to actually make it do the things you want to do and get away with this is kind of like the very Gen X, temporary autonomous zone hacker Cypher freak ethos, we can create a space for autonomy.
And my junior year of college, I ended up coming up with the basis with the beginnings of my meta theory of particularly how culture and Technology Co create each other and spent the next what was that probably 93 2007 614 15 years, kind of playing that out and refining it building in me just rest. So, you know, I was reading gt Lewis, and learning how to do learning how to do information through for video compression, for example, or more specifically actually reading logic and sense and learning how to do spreadsheets, actually for more more specifically. And so eventually what this leads me to is, I figured out another hack, which is a social hack that university is largely credentialing, credentialing exercise, just content, you can meet people but largely credentials and exercise. And that to be able to move into the economic functions that have the most leverage and the interface to technology and culture. I high tech entrepreneurship. I needed to get a more legible credential and a relatively research led me to the path of noticing that you can get into law school through the vehicle doing well on a standardized test, and really nothing else. And so I knew from experience that I could do well on standardized tests. So I took a weekend study for the LSAT took the LSAT, low cost. If I got a good score, cool if I didn't, who cares? I got a good score. This allowed me to get into Harvard Law School, which the law school part you can kind of like tear off the bottom of the deployment throw away because most people just read the first letter. H O, Harvard. Cool. That's neat. You had a credential. So that's right. So I spent three years again, more or less not go to law school, I spent most of my time with Larry Lessig. And with people like Cornell West, and folks like that doing whatever I thought was interesting, and continue to refine the stuff that I've been trying to figure out. lesyk stuff was awesome, very, very important. For me, at least and more broadly back then. And then when I graduated, moved out to California had idea, by the way, how the tech industry worked at all zero experience. And for example, the new hot San Francisco is the place to go, I just need to kind of West was a good, good directionality. 
And in San Diego ended up getting involved in the high tech scene ended up being involved in the startup of three companies in a row pretty quickly, right at the froth stage of the.com. Boom, something called mp3. And then the third company was devex, which I was the founder and CEO of the road that through the bubble popping, and then all the way up to the financial crisis of 2008. But it's nice like I actually got on the one hand to apply the underlying theory, refining the theory and practice like really seeing firsthand how a lot of these things emerged and went through their arcs like from inception all the way to maturity to that to that pace and ended up with enough resources that I could more or less do it, I wanted to so so then I did and spent two glorious years doing exactly what I want to do. And in the process of that larger what I want to do is like spend time at a place called the Santa Fe Institute. And by the way, another place called Necker Island. So like, two very different versions of what I want to, but continued, by the way, basically, under the heading of getting a better sense of what's exactly going on, like our Who are these rich people we've heard of, and who are the global elite that we've heard so much about? Why we just meet them and find out. So I did. And in the context of science, right, we're the smartest people do the most interesting work in the broadest way over here. Okay, cool. Let's go spend time with them as well. But then the financial crisis hit. And I happen to be just sitting there at a place where I could ask questions. And so I started asking questions. And it was this really interesting place where I was literally at a conference at SSI when I think like the Dow dropped 800 points, 900 points and 1000 points like day after day after day, which had consequence of getting a lot of attention. And I was able to watch the story that was being told through MSNBC, and through official channels as able to ask the actual Nobel Prize winning economist who just happened to be like right there, what's actually going on, and is able to then witness the gap between the official story what was really happening and the fact the economists had no fucking idea. Their even their underlying models were just whack.
So I got interested in so I started digging, and I just more or less followed my nose. You know, I tried to read all the books on money theory, for example. And David Gruber's book, by the way, is fantastic. And blows a lot of concepts, particularly the legitimacy of the economic discipline out of the water. And of course, also that of things like complexity economics, but didn't you know, that usually doesn't stop there, which you start Get into complexity, the first thing we learned is that everything is connected everything else. So if you want to do economics, you also have to look at the interface between economics and politics. I think yesterday, we talked about the four layer model that talks about the past, you could you can, for example, model, finance, economics, politics and culture as being distinct layers, that feedback nature, the very complex fashion, but that if you have a financial crisis, you can actually allow that financial crisis to happen at the finance level. And while it will have an impact at the economic level, it may not necessarily have any meaningful impact at the political level, it may even strengthen the political level. Or you can do what we did, which was, you can actually, more or less bail out well, both metaphorically and practically bail out the financial level, by spending cultural currency, meaning breaking people's underlying trust at the political level, and then ultimate, even at the cultural, which is a people's sense of being part of the same cultural fabric. Greece, for example, I think it's had a lot That. Then of course, again watching that in real time, so again, a place of being able to be front and center with the unfurling of reality. And by the way, having skin in the game, my large pile of money that I'd made by being a tech entrepreneur became a smaller pile of money as a result of the financial crisis. I wasn't a threat term dissenters, I was not disinterested, I was quite interested in a bit pissed off, to be perfectly frank. And I got even more pissed off as I continued watching what was happening because it was, to me at least no increasingly obvious that the choices that were being made at the level of how our collective choice making worked, let's say, for example, the level politics were bad, like actually bad, like they would have long term negative consequences and just kept on going deeper. 
And then I found myself in a situation where I had a series of significant ohshit where I'd have conversations with people who were really like the expert in some particular domain of interests, they, for example, a nuclear proliferation, or the concentration of estrogen in amphibians, like very narrow, specific domains. And I had probably over a period about a year, a series of conversations, each one of which was things are really terrible. Like there's something going on that is way bad, like nuclear proliferation. The likelihood that we will be able to to keep the world from having a quite significant bad nuclear event of the next decade is very low like 5% like sitting there with like the three experts in the world in that question, they're all like nodding their head saying yeah, this is fucked like they were This is really a serious problem. And then taking literally one step back and noticing that that fact is not seem to propagate out of that room. And then beginning to you know, get my metamodel relationship between culture technology now just plugging away In relationship between politics and technology between communications and politics and between environmental and between the of the whole thing, I began to notice that I seem to be one of the very few people who was talking to all these different groups and trying to see we'll have a chain fit together from beginning to end, top to bottom. And how the thing everything synthesize, and what happens when you start thinking about changes in rainfall and temperature impact on food with populations and politics. What impact is migration have on political stability? What impact is political stability have on financial stability, like, you know, watching the cascade effects, and somewhere around I guess 2012 came to the conclusion that the thing that we're operating in whatever the container is, that keeps the world held in a somewhat functioning system is end of life. This theoretical ways to describe exactly why exactly what it is exactly why. And exactly what we might be able to do about which, by the way is very little in the context of itself, right. So we've reached the end of life of a deep premise on how to go about being humans together in relationship to the world. And we're seeing this come to fruition, everywhere, by the way, I mean, everywhere, you can even literally describe Hollywood blockbuster films in this model, and video games. So.
Okay, so then the next couple of years was given that is get back to actuation. So in a sense, making this take what might we be able to do, and this gave rise to a project that became called game B, which some people have heard about, which is actually kind of neat, because they were ultimately about 30 or 40 people who were involved in that project, and we weren't able to get to where it needed to get to in and of itself, so it dissolved the project in the 2013 or so. Maybe 2014 The fact that the concept of propagated out is actually very interesting reality, but not vastly. And means that kind of gets us more or less where we are so. 

Int 16:15
So the story that I've heard you sketch out is that you have been a tech entrepreneur for many years, which has given you the ability to then kind of detach a little bit, take a bit more of a bird's eye view and speak to people who really know what's going on in the culture, try to understand and put the pieces together. One of the things that I've heard you talk about a lot is the crisis of sense making, which in some sense, seems to be underneath all these other crises. Because if we can't make sense of the world, it's very difficult to know what we what we should do next. So what would you How would you describe the crisis of sense making?

Jordan 16:50  
What I'd like to do first is maybe establish a method and in the method that I would propose is one Having a kind of attentional parallax, which is to say that we're going to talk about it. And we're also going to be doing it. And we're going to be aware of both. So we have a couple of different perspectives going on simultaneously. So what I'd invite is to be able to notice that there's that fact and if you can try to be split your attention into three distinct pieces and try to be aware of all three simultaneously. Now, in the context of what's called the big question, in a situation, where are we?
One of the things that will notice is that we're engaging in a narrative. We end up having to take a slice, like our attention is finite, really quite distinctly finite. And our capacity to engage in conversation has some linearity to it may be wondering, but it has a reality tunnel is compact. But the problem that we're in isn't its whole It's a wholeness to it. It's a whole system. And I don't want to use the strictly physical, but it's a wholeness. So we find ourselves in a circumstance where we have to use just a lens, a perspective, but be aware of the fact that we're trying to do is actually grasp a whole. And it's a little bit like that. But at least my version of my take on that story of the blind men and the elephant, where if the blind men take the perspective as being the whole, they're making an error, right? It's the task turns into a rhino and the foot turns into a tree. But as the blind men are able to recognize the distinction between the narrow finite perspective that they're holding, and the notion is a trying to grasp the whole, and then they communicate with each other, they establish a parallax, then they can, in fact, perhaps grasp the whole. 
Oh, it's an elephant. And there's something about that that is very much more than just the sum of their particular perspectives that take a lot more in this case. Can we can even maybe enrich that metaphor by saying, Okay, well, we generally when I say it's an elephant will end up happening is will, will actually have a visual take, we see the whole elephant but the blind that are blind, they feel pieces. And we perceive seeing the whole elephant is somehow seeing the whole. But of course we're not, we're seeing the exterior as reflected by light, when we're seeing, we're not seeing the interior the elephant, we're not seeing its blood pumping, we're not seeing the micro level of the metabolic processes. We're not seeing the genetic code converting into proteins. We're not seeing the developmental history, the Elephant Elephant through its lifetime as an elephant. We're not seeing the evolutionary history of the becoming of elephant missing world, which is part of the whole. And so it's interesting progress, the relationship between the parts that were perceived by the blind men and the hole that we could perceive we saw and then noticing that that whole that we see is actually a part of a whole and we just try to Kind of absorb that and take that as almost a moral lesson and how to tell the difference between dark parts and holes. Then we can talk about the crisis of sense making, because it is a part of a larger story. But a big answer to the question is being able to separate between parts and holes and actually learn how to perceive through wholeness. And that last part has a lot of richness to it, I think. 
So there's a lot of different ways to start this. I think I'll just kind of start near the end and then teleport to the beginning. So, so near the end, we have we have a problem. And that is, if we want to be able to respond to our environment. If we Want to be able to make good choices and execute on our actions effectively, it's useful to know what the fuck is going on. This is particularly true when we're dealing with multiple people, we're trying to get us all to work together. And we're in a situation where the magnitude, the complexity of the problem domain that we're dealing with is very large and getting larger by the minute. And at the same time, the way that we go about knowing what's going on together, is actually at its best, isn't up to the task, at its best could not make sense of what was happening. And it's actually getting worse and worse every day. So if we need to be here, we're here we're going that way and the problems getting bigger. So I would consider that to be a because of ever increasing complexity. 
No. me get to that in a moment. We'll take that as a whole piece. And yes, by the way, but it's complex to figure to explain why that's the case. But just by itself, we can just take a look at the degrading functionality of our sense making systems has its own story. And we can talk about the increasing complexity of our environment as its own story. And then we can actually talk about how those two pieces actually fit together in a larger story. So that's the where we are now as we talk about the crisis and sense making through trying to get to the edge of it, like why does that land? Why is it a meaningful proposition? What I would say is that we can't make sense of what's going on. And I mean this in almost any way. Like we can't make sense of climate change. Can't make sense of financial instability. We can't make sense of why politics is unrolling the way it is. We can't make sense of gender. We can't make sense of why we can't make sense of gender. We're rapidly moving in the direction having a very hard time making sense about anything at all. And the urgency, the the level of meaningfulness, the level of impact little consequence of the need, of us making sense is increasing. 
So we're in a situation where we actually have to be really, really good at making choices, because we're very powerful in the context of our world. And so that means our sense making has to be vastly better than where it is right now. And otherwise, we're likely going to be experiencing the phenomenon like wheels coming off small perturbations, creating bigger perturbations creating a de destabilization in both sense making and harder choices leading to a race effect into catastrophe. So that's a crisis. That's what I mean by crisis and sense making. So maybe now we can teleport back and do some basic models like some basic notions actually did this in the blue church essay. So, what I want to introduce some concepts around coherence. And yeah, I'll do maybe two turns on it at different levels of scale. So let's just begin with one I got one eye, and that gives you a certain level of perception. And then you have two eyes. And you may notice the two eyes are better than one, in fact, a lot better than one. So then you might think, well, I should stop, there's two heads are better than one. But it's actually quite important that they're not independent. It's crucial that they be bound into a visual field, you notice that you actually don't see two eyes, you see one reality. So they are coherent. So there's a capacity to have diversity of perspective in this case, and also to integrate it into a wholeness of perception. So those are all part of the same chunk. So you want to have is an increasing diversity of, in this case perception while maintaining an integrated wholeness of perception. And that combination, I'm going to call it coherence of perception at least. So then you will, you might choose, you might want to add a third eye. And that's cool. Flies have multiple eyes. That's neat. But here's a better move at hearing at ears. If you had hearing division, that's a lot lot better than just having three eyes. Because you've modally shifted, you actually have qualitatively different perceptive capacities. And you might notice the, for example, a very large amount of seeing doesn't really help you at all and the domain of hearing and vice versa. So modal increase in perspective, capacity, and then still being able to integrate that into a wholeness of perception. Of course, this is just experiencing reality. That's one story, right? There's one story of coherence and I'm using that to give you a sense of it in your own body. Your body is a coherent entity at the level of perception of many, many, many different modes and many different kinds within those modes, two ears, two eyes, that are integrated into a coherent wholeness, that gives rise to your perceptive capacities. And we'll get back to that, by the way, because the individual human body is important in this story.
But then we can step it up, does that take a group, and now I'm going to combine both perception and action, because of course, your body does that. But we'll do it in a group in the church, as had talked about it in the context of rowing a boat. So in the beginning, let's say you're trying to canoe you have one more, and you have to have the effort of getting the physical motion to put into on the water and pulling it not tipping over the boat. So that's a set of functions instead of different kinds of perception and actuation capacity shift, have some sensitivity to how your weight is affecting the way to the boat and how to how your arms moving the orange the water, but as individual as it as a body which is coherent. It's a relatively straightforward thing to do. And you can notice this when you go from one order to you go from a canoe to a rowboat. But once you add the second war takes a little bit of time to figure out how to get them all together, but not too long. You can become coherent, you can bring tours into coherence, you can take the sensitive, since sensing of muscle too, or feeling when they're in the water and pulling it in the motion, the boat you integrated, integrated, integrated, and it pops you have an insight which you just said you bring into your body, the wholeness of that and you've integrated that into a coherent whole, you can now actually run the boat. But now you had another person into the boat. And notice that there's a significant difference there. That two people rowing the boat is the hardest thing that you have to use communication, you have to actually practice substantially more. If you get a sense an embodied sense and feeling and say it's just rowing canoe, it's a little bit easier. 
The person in the front, the person in the back, you may even have official divisions of labor. The person that back is steering well the person in the front is you know, just Rowan, the person that acts in charge, like there's a big bunch of stuff that has to happen, that enables two people to come into coherence. And you may be able to scale that to say three people. But at a certain point, you actually start seeing a phase transition where, and particularly now switch, switch it to Rowan, with two oars, you've got three people in the boat, you really do have to start doing division of labor. To maintain that you have to actually have the guy in the front I suppose, who's yelling stroke, because otherwise, the ability of the individuals to stay coordinate stay perception linked to action in a fashion is acting as an integrated whole. It's not up to snuff, like we as humans haven't got the capacity to be able to maintain that much complexity with our embodied story and without trying to simplify the task. So we do we simplify agency, we actually compress the agency and the perception and the actual agency. So what happens is you now become a instrument. You no longer have full agency over your choice, making Well, your perception, you don't decide when to stroke, you just do it when told. And if everybody now is acting in that actuation function, and the person up front is doing at least a mediocre job of keeping a good rhythm, suddenly, you're now coherent again, and able to go much, much faster. Hence the driver, the big guy with the drums. That's my vision. I'm not British, I don't have the Oxford notion.
Okay, so that's the framework. And the reason why I want to wrote that framework is that this this dynamic between complex coherence, your body integrated as a whole, and what I'm gonna call complicated coherence, which is this relation of simplification and actuation through some kind of structure is a big part of the rollout of what I've come to call game A, which may also call civilization if you want to sort of start at 15 20,000 In years and up to 10 years from now, that story and it's a story where just like moving from one person to three people to seven people and moving from one or two tours is a story of an increase in the, the nature of the lived environment that our structures of sense making and choice making an actuation are endeavouring to be coherent in into different give us the capacity to operate in effectively as a group. Okay, so you can then use this to decompose take a look at Bronze Age, psycho technology, as john Vicki, Vicki, Vicki i think is right now very lucidly articulating this notion, psycho technology and how it rolls up. And you can look at the transitions of when that particular tool kit fails, how turns into collapse, how in the Intermezzo that collapse, there's a New liminal experimental phase of building up new toolkits that are able to handle the complex problem of all the diverse elements of the new state of affairs, larger population, new technologies, they have to deal with different environmental constants, integrating that into some kind of new, coherent whole, through some kind of set of technologies for doing it. And then how that does what it does. And broadly speaking, in a triadic relationship, it has to be able to be responsive to nature, to be able to feed itself and survive the winter has to be able to be responsive to other things like it that may tend to take its stuff away. And it needs to be able to maintain its internal integrity, not fall apart from the inside out. 
Of course, the broad story of gay has been different efforts to figure out how to solve that problem and how they fell. And then how we, you know, pick up the pieces and put it back together again, and try to kind of go back into it. So we can then tell the story of that story, we can zoom all the way back to the Paleolithic transition, and work our way through step by step. And that's a very good, useful thing to do. And I think John's narrative in my narrative are very connected. And they're two very nice parallax perspectives, if you take his entire perspective, and you take the one that I could rolled out today, if you'd like, and notice that the two different perspectives on a whole, and then try to grasp the whole, which was he and I are urging you to do then you're in a really good place. And there's other people who are doing the same kind of thing. And that's the thing is the key is to be able to recognize that there each perspectives on a hole, which happens to be by the way, reality. And if you're able to hold that notion of wholeness and then allow the perspective to give you sensing into what the wholeness might be, then you can start dropping into deeper insight about the nature of the hole and then begin to be able to make better choices. So I'm tempted right now to kind of drop into the blue church story. Just kind of fast forward, but fast forward from the axial age.

Int 33:06  
Yeah. I mean, the question that comes up when you talk about game A, is game A synonymous with the blue church?

Jordan 33:12  
No, no, game A is larger. But in terms of the structure to create coherence, that's the blue church. Blue church is the very specific solution to the problem during the timeframe between roughly 1930 through 2016. So it's much the same way than say, pre Arusha Chilean Athens had a solution to the problem. The blue church is a historically specific solution to the problem of which game A is the general category of establishing coherence of establishing coherence and very particularly using complicated systems if you want to be precise, so using some comment A nation of simplification and causal mechanism to be able to establish coherence in perception in meaning making and an actuation. So that's game A.
And we get a little bit more precision and what I mean by that. So, we talked about as a rower when you shift from being a fully autonomous free agent to being the guy who just does what he's told. That's what I mean. So simplification and bounding choice within a spray causal context. So, if you remember Henry Ford's story, you can choose whatever color you want, as long as it's black, that kind of an idea. You take choice, the human capacity to have free will to make choice and you put it in a box You get a very specific set of input outputs, you make it machining, right? You can say the game a is a machine ik structure. It is fundamentally computational in nature. Of course, it's always complicated by the fact that it's always in relationship with nature, wild nature, human nature. But its internet, its essence is of that sort. And so every Brock bureaucracies and effort to do that, right, you want to have very well defined processes and very well defined inputs, very well defined outputs. And then the human agents you put into the box, have choice within that box. And so you can put the bottle cap on the bottle or not, but that's it. That's what you do on the assembly line. Or what is it you file the weenus and you check one of three boxes and then you you put it out there or you fill in the spreadsheet and you input an output or you try to turn human agency into effective delivery of choice making in the context. A Broader system that is computational in nature. And the reason for that, of course, is to simplify, you radically, radically simplify the amount of complexity that each individual has to hold. And you try to therefore create a system that has enough information processing and actuation capacity to manage complexity. That's what you're trying to do trying to manage complexity with a complicated system that is gaming. There's a couple other ways of looking at it, but that's a very good way of looking at it. And so, what we find is, over time, in remember there's three different dimensions you have relationship with nature with the world, in relationship with other people who are trying to play that same game.
And in relationship with your interiority, with how your interior system of people doing peacefulness, which is complex, is working out inside. And what I mean by that people doing people in this you have things like defection and self de And corruption and well stupidity and fill in the blank, like the whole complexity of being human has a corrosive effect on the well functioning of your social machine. And then the competitive pressures of, let's say, the Chinese who are rolling out sesame credits to try to make their machine more functional. What do you do? Well, if their machine is better than your machine, they can take your stuff. And that may end up being catastrophic to your machine. And then of course, nature, if it turns out that we no longer can grow food that isn't a very effective machine. And we have stories we have stories like the the tainter curve, that talks about how and why these kinds of complicated social machines break down in the context of nature that we can go into at Nazim if you'd like, and we can talk about why they fail. I think it was I think that the segue into the blue church was good is okay. So, now we're gonna move to the blue church. So what we do is we have a few amount of people just recapitulate that story. I think I can do it pretty quickly. So we're exiting what I call the Victorian synthesis. And we're talking the time frame, roughly 1852 1910 or so. And we're entering into a period of chaos. There's actually a little collapse that happened right there. It's not a Bronze Age collapse, it's pretty decent collapse. The period from the end of World War One to the end of World War Two, which you may remember kind of sucked. And a lot of stuff happened but a lot of change occurred in that context.
The Titanic always feels like this kind of weird harbinger of that's because you watch Downton Abbey. Titanic seems like a weird harbinger of yet. It has that archetypical feeling of a portent Yeah. And of course it is right. It's saying, hey, Victorian synthesis, complex reality is still out there. You have not yet in fact, conquered it. Just because of the kind of the moral lesson of course, the World War One is it was a demoralization of the sense of mastery. This is the complicated had finally mastered the complex, largely in the in the context of human humaneness. And then we get to delve into the meltdown of culture, mostly in Germany, but elsewhere. And then we got to delve into what happens when culture melts down. And then we got to build a new church. So coming out of World War Two, we have a new state of affairs. So a new set of problems a new set of capacities with which to engage in trying to bring the complicated relationship with the complex. So we have the mass production, and also the movement of industrial like trains to cars. And in post World War Two mass production of cars like the invention of the blue to produce a lot of it and so the significant Economic dislocation that that involves in the mass wealth, at least in in the US and then ultimately percolating out into the quote unquote, first world. You have mass media. And you have the ability first, or in the earliest stages, mostly radio, but then transitioning very quickly and for the dominant period of the blue church TV, right, which has lots of characteristics. And maybe we'll probably zoom in on that, because it's so important, but me do a few more. You have education, the formal structure of like, for example, the missile gap during the Kennedy years to vastly increase the intensity of expenditure and effort on college education at the number of kids who went to college, through the arc of the blue church went from I think, like 20% to 85% or something like that. So significant, and the, the normalization of education because obviously when High School is no longer a and of itself, but as part of a larger story, it now becomes some train to a bigger structure now becomes normalized as a single subject. 
A lot more people, you know, the population went from 100 million the US to 300 million during that arc. So it's a lot and a lot of urbanization. And and by the way, mixing of demographics, because you had the interstate highway system allowed people in cars to drive around. So you had the massive diaspora, of moving from city centers into the suburbs, and moving from the east to the west and the south. So a lot of change happened. And the blue church emerged in the context of having to figure out how to navigate all of these changes and generate coherence. How do we get all of these people with these new capacities to be able to make sense of the world in some fashion that is able to then make choices together and to act effectively? Right, that's the question. And the blue church developed to be the answer to that question. So develop the ability to say for example, use the education system to establish an embodied sense of vertical meritocratic hierarchy. idea that some people are better at others in knowing certain kinds of things, we can find them. And then we empower them to have hierarchical authority in the structure that we're in. And I say this, by the way, both formally and informally, the role of being in class is teaching that whether the content of the story of the class, whatever the content, the class is, the experience of the student is the teachers in charge. Our job is just to listen. And some of us are smart, and they get to be teachers, or in charge, right? That's kind of that's the story of school. It's very important that first part, that there's a relationship between authority and receptor that has a broadcast modality, the blue church is very broadcast across its entire mode. So what I mean by broadcast, of course is exemplified in television, which is to say that that some small number of people get to see beak. And a very, very large number of people get to listen, as is very different and then say what we're doing right here and symmetric. While Of course, I'm the one speaking in principle, there's nothing about this conversation that couldn't be perfectly symmetric. But in television, in any kind of broadcast modality, it's structurally that way. So Walter Cronkite tells the news, and everybody else watches it. And there's a lot of positivity there. Like my job is not to perceive what's going on, make sense of it, and then express it in the world. 
My job is to see the story that I'm being told, and be able to then express that story effectively in the society that I'm in. And I call this good sense, the emergence of good sense. And you see an emerging mesh of good sense you who are the authoritative speakers, whether they're NBC News, or they're the New York Times, and this is a diversity of course, there's a variety of different perspectives in the authority to framework. The blue church recognizes the necessity of having eyes and ears. But it also recognizes the necessity of having coherence. So there's a diversity. But there's a diversity within a particular boundary. And so when you show up in society, if you are speaking, good sense, if your expressions are of the sort that everybody else has broadly been hearing or the authoritative statements, then you're showing up well, and if you aren't, then you're showing up poorly. And you'll notice that, like if you begin to say things that are contrary narrative in a deep way, even today, much less so now, though, then like 30 years ago, then you will notice discomfort, people get uncomfortable viscerally physically. And you will notice that discomfort this way physically, then you'll stop doing it. And so there's a nice policing mechanism that just at the cocktail party set, particularly in places like say New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, San Francisco, where the the elite cache is the most important were the choice of social successes. The choice between being elevated in the hierarchy or not, then good sense becomes even more self policing. So good opinion, say good opinion. Thank you. Thank you good opinion. This is actually interesting to make that distinction. Because the effort of the bootrec is actually to provide good sense. What is the truth about the war in Vietnam? But of course, we can only produce this good opinion, what is our perspective? And then make sure everybody more or less has that. Because then you can actually have choices, you can actually make choices together and we all more or less agree, this is the nature of reality, and we more words agree that these kinds of actions will lead to effective results. Then we're, we're rowing the boat to the Cocteau Twins. 
Yeah, we're pushing. We have a menu that has six buttons, pick which button you like to push, you have choice, no question, but it's in a constraint, right within a boundary condition that works. And then what happens is when you push the button, it actually it's a whole lot of stuff. We've all decided that we're going to have a war on poverty. So we turn the dial on the world war two era bureaucratic machinery that took us to the moon that built the interstate highway system. And then we say, okay, go out and point that engine at poverty, we're going to start building the welfare state go. Right. And that's what they did. And they sometimes it worked. You pointed it at the moon got us to the moon, imported poverty, and it didn't work wonderfully created a mess. That tells us a lot, by the way. So I guess kind of that's that, like, that's the blue church. And there's no treatment, because this structure has Harvard is kind of at the top. And then you have the rest of the Ivy League and Oxford and Cambridge and sad to say that the UK lost their position, the Victorian synthesis, the UK centric, the blue church was a US centric, global sense making system and it was broadly global. Of course, to the first three quarters, there was the Eastern Bloc that was doing their own thing. But starting in the late 80s, totally global and for a little bit of time there In fact, actually functionally global on the period from 88 to maybe 1999, was a period where the blue church was a true headline, and was doing stuff.

Int 47:12  
And what constitutes the blue church? You mentioned Harvard, but good just to sketch out?

Jordan 47:20  
Huh, it's interesting way of asking the question. So I thought it was just telling you. So the set of ways of going about making sense broadcast modality, formal good opinion, structures of hierarchy. This constitutes a blueprint in terms of who's part of it who who has hierarchy in the blue church, I think is the question you're asking, Who has thought of Harvard, Ivy League universities, some of the sort of bigger think tanks, the RAND Corporation, significant governmental entities like the Department of Defense, NASA, CIA in different domains. large corporations in GM, G. Back in the day when that was like when it's good for General Motors is good for America. It's a very blue church kind of concept. It means shifted to the tech sector for a little bit. Microsoft and Apple and that kind of thing had a little bit of cachet. Some of the media structures like the New York Times The Washington Post really called the paper of record. The more formal authoritative broadcast television programs, NBC, ABC, CBS, CNN for a while, like in the heyday that you could look at that second tier going on in the critical allies. I think Japan is probably third tier perfectly frank. So the UK isn't very much in the second tier, Oxford, Cambridge, The Guardian. actually know what some of the other I'm sure there are other equivalent like Tavistock or something to have think Tinky functions in the UK the various papers of record in Germany and France, and their governments include their entire government. It has second tier status visa v say, the God in the US has that kind of a structure. So, please those suspects, it's not that hard. Think, who? Who knows stuff? There's a certain question, you have to ask Who you gonna ask Who do you think will be able to answer that question effectively, who will if they tell you that 17 intelligence agencies agree, do you believe it's telling you the truth? Encyclopedia Britannica is a very churchy function. And the idea that the what is it called the American Association for the Advancement of sciences, those kinds of things. Nobel Prize winners are very blue church. Just went interesting. Eric talks about that a bit. There's a certain special arc in the sciences where you get this special badge that gives you cachet that is brought in what's the guy's name of the New York Times who writes the economics Paul Krugman is a Nobel Prize winning columnist, which means he gets to talk about anything he wants to. And somehow his special genius which sometimes it's true, and sometimes it's not.
By the way, just at the Federal Reserve is a big one. The IMF is a big one, or part of the blue church. The Council on Foreign Relations is a big one. And by the way, this is just like real things like the CFR was something that was started in the 1930s, a bunch of smart people in New York thought, hey, if we get together, we can make things happen that are better than if we don't, and just kind of iterate on that. And that's kind of like the cocktail party set. But there's a feedback loop. Remember, I mentioned that actually did some case studies actually went to places where fancy rich people hung out, mostly Aspen and Necker, in other places like Hollywood. And what I noticed was my first person experience was that there is absolutely for sure and elite conspiracy, which is just they all kind of hang out in the same place and like each other. But it has a characteristic. Now, if three, four people, one of whom happens to be in charge of Deutsche Telekom, one of them happens to be in charge of British Telecom, one of them happens to be in charge of a global investment bank, one of whom happens to be a successful entrepreneur who just is looking for something to do. And they're hanging out at a dinner table in Aspen, and they just start shooting the shit. They don't have a lot to talk about, because there's only certain things that they actually do, which is business and politics, but mostly business. So they start talking about business. And it turns out that there's there's an opportunity for Georgia talking about British Telecom to sell their their cell mobile divisions that to a new company, the bank will fund and this guy will run. You'd be surprised how rapidly that gets surfaced and identified as a thing to do. Now, growing up in the Texas Hill Country, I wasn't having those kinds of conversations, and I think most people don't. So that's an example. Right? That that that's an artifact that emerges out of the notion of the blue church that once you have A vertical hierarchy and then by definition, you have a finite amount of time. 
You get clusters of these people who are hanging together. And then by the way, a lot of that human complexity creeps back in, they start having clubs, clicks, they start caring about each other. And that's what you're getting a lot of groupthink, that good opinion starts to really solidify and they become blind to what's not within that good opinion. Yeah, in fact, so at this point and introduce another concept, it's kind of a deep concept is very useful, and it'll help us navigate the transition of what's happening. So here, the concept is that's a bundle. So what we're going to do fitness landscapes, we're going to do the idea of of excellence and remark ability, and then we're going to do niche construction. Okay, I don't think it'll take that long. Very helpful. So, fitness landscape is a concept that originated in evolutionary theory biological illusionary theory. But evolutionary theory has become more and more meta so covers a much more abstract functions. The fitness landscape is an abstract concept. And what it describes is where you have agents that have resource needs, and will find themselves in conflict with each other and with the environment to acquire the resources, and have an agency, then certain kinds of things are going to happen. And the landscape describes what strategies what kind of approaches what kind of agentive choices or capacity to make choices will end up being successful. And then as it turns out, if strategy, effective strategy can be passed down, either moment to moment or, you know, child to parent a child, then you start getting concentrations around good strategies because those were successful repeat. 
So, if you look at a fitness landscape, for example, in the Arctic, the strategy of being a dark black rabbit is poor. And so you might think of it as a valley It's a very low fitness choice and so nothing survives very long down there. Whereas the strategy of being a perfectly white fuzzy Bunny is good. So it's very high point. And if you imagine you were to change the fitness landscape to take my two bunnies and shift them to put the say in the desert, well, maybe it's a brown Bunny, just to make it a better metaphor, Sandra. The bunnies are the same, the landscape just inverted. So now being a bright white fuzzy Bunny is bad, you're gonna die out and being a brown jackrabbit. It's good, you know, survive versus the relationship. So then, if you imagine that fitness landscapes have a certain topography and a certain variability, so topography, meaning what's the shape of the hills? Is there one big hill right in the middle? Are there a whole bunch of little hills? And what's the space between them? And how long do they last? Is it fluctuating wildly? Or is it just like, one massive Hill forever? And I'm going to define a concept called excellence. Think Brett Weinstein actually uses different terms. So I'll just define them I'm pretty sure he does imagery uses the right terms, but I'll use my terms. So excellence here refers to a strategy, which is about climbing the hill you're on, and getting very good at holding the top. So if I'm in a landscape that is defined by a small number of large hills, and it doesn't change very much excellence is a very good strategy. 
If I happen to be near the bottom, vaguely near the bottom of a good Hill, then what I do is I climb all the way to the top, and then I stay there. saber toothed tiger, Goldman Sachs banker, right, excellent. So then the next concept is a remarkable especially with Valley crossing, sorry, that's the formal term. So then in an environment where there may be in fact, many hills that maybe not aren't so tall, or just many hills, and or a lot of variability, then excellent starts to be a pretty poor strategy, because there's a lot of competition trying to get to the top of that one big hill every Nobody's right there. So it's hard to get to the top. And particularly if you aren't the very top being third or fourth tier really sucks. If it's possible for me to go down for a little bit, which isn't great, but to get across to a different hill where there's less competition, that's awesome. So this is the remarkable strategy, the valley crossing strategy. It's very different strategy. And equivalently. If it turns out that we're all in this big hill, and then it goes away. Whoever had the capacity to go somewhere else wins survives, as you didn't that rates, the saber toothed Tiger goes extinct. And it turns out these two strategies have a certain tension. So if you're really optimizing for excellence, one of the things you'll have to do is get rid of your remarkable needs to make room for more excellence. You become a saber toothed tiger, or a Tyrannosaurus Rex. If you're really optimizing for remarkable illness, you don't have room for the specialization of excellence and so you're not gonna be able to be as effective.
So let me add, finally, niche construction. It's very important. So niche construction is your strategy is not just responsive to the niche passively, it's able to feed back on the niche actively. That's you're able to transform the fitness landscape into something that by hypothesis you prefer. So if the brown bunny could somehow say, put a lot of sand on the Arctic and turn up the temperature and convert the Arctic into the desert, it would do so it has nice construction. Now, of course, you can imagine that when excellence combined with excellence at niche construction, you get a very interesting dynamic. It turns the fitness landscape into a hill, and then it keeps it there. And then it becomes more and more excellent. So I have double order called local excellence. I'm good at climbing this hill that have global excellence. I'm good at keeping this hill taller and stable. Well, that was the great moderation of the blue church. One of the things the blue church was able to do was niche country. struct, its own environment on a global basis and hold it constant. And the thought that has been very good and complicated is likes to keep complexity at bay. Let's keep the world from changing too much. We want to keep things more or less structured where they are, allow it to evolve within bounds. But the structure the primary components of particular tall part of the structure, and the fundamental content of the fact of the structure stays the same. And this turns into, for example, the notion of financial bubbles, instead of letting financial crises actually wash all the way down through into the political level, for example, maybe even to the cultural level and shift things at the cultural level that maybe could go for some growth. Holding it. Keeping it static, prevented the EU from collapsing in 2010 11. Right. And holding it, which of course creates an excellence creates a fitness landscape that reinforces what's already there. It makes puts more and more energy on it. Because if you bet against the Greek debt, when the EU bailed them out, you lost. And so you're gone. 
You know, we're on the board. And so there's a continuing cycle of that, but reality doesn't give a fuck. So reality is still there complexity and the fundamental nature of reality is still doing its thing. And by the way, as you begin to the longer you keep the niche the way it is, you also start running into the complexity from the inside. You get the humaneness you get corruption starts to work its way in and eventually run into a collapse of it get into some scenario where the the interior the structure in this case, the blue church, finds itself in a context that is, in fact, changing outside the boundaries of its ability to control through new construction. And so what ends up happening is you get almost a cobra banding effect. The nice changing like this, it kind of like wanting to change, wanting to change, wanting to change, wanting to change building up pressure all over the place until eventually the ability to hold back the waters breaks. And you actually have a dam bursting phenomenal catastrophe like catastrophe theory in math, Bubbles, popping dams, bursting ropes tearing, like there's a whole mathematical description of phenomena, the state shift we one state and another discontinuously. And that's what happens. So that's that's a tell us where we are, is the blue church was really, really good that what it was doing the best ever, and we got 8 billion people under its stewardship, and broadly speaking quite peacefully, and we've not met, we've managed not to kill ourselves with a nuke, which is actually quite a bit of a feat. And the level of poverty is gone down. The level of wealth has gone up lifespans are back to pre agricultural levels, which is ironically funny to say, but isn't that the standard that we've got? So we're now people are living as long as we lived back 45,000 years ago. Although by the way that is healthy in that last 20 or so years. God to the moon can fly around, that's all kinds of awesome stuff has happened. But in the meantime, it's obsolete, meaning both that the complexity of the world that we now live in, and largely as a consequence, as a consequence of communication technology is changing, the velocity of change is possible and 8 billion people changing the amount of stuff that's being talked about. And as a consequence of all of our acceleration capacity, lots and lots of cars and lots and lots of large tankers shipping across the oceans, pushing the environmental system out of equilibrium along many, many different dimensions, not just co2 or methane. The scope of what this complicated system means take responsibility for it now the whole thing. So it has to move from being able to take control of some defined domain that's actually take control the whole, enduring. And in the meantime, so that's what I mean, the scope is gotten bigger, and it's outside the boundary capacities of what this kind of says Be consistent can do it all.

Int 1:02:15  
Before we move off the blue church too much, I'd like to get this with the broadcast versus digital paradigm and the need for discernment.

Jordan 1:02:24  
Okay. So let's do it in that context. So I'm thinking versus simulated thinking. So broadcast. So we're talking about a notion where broadcast is faced with a couple of different problems and and we're talking about it both from the outside and with those three domains. So from one perspective, broadcast has limitations in its capacity to perceive and respond to reality, just is pretty obvious. But if you think about what's happening is every layer of the hierarchy has to compress the information. You know, if you were out in fields seeing what's going on with, say, the rain forest insects, and you're reporting it up to somebody who's at a think tank is reporting up to a policy maker who's putting it up to a legislative decision maker, they're having to simplify a lot to go up the chain. Right, so you're losing enormous amount of information, which means that you can only do so much, it's kind of like, if you imagine this back in the 80s, they had those glass spheres, if you touch them, lightning bolts will touch your fingers. So the sphere is the whole thing. And the broadcast modality is one of those lightning bolts. So it kind of like maneuvers around the sphere, but it only handle that much. And it's not a lot. This is the nature of the structure, right? Just the structure that has that kind of geometry to it can only perceive a certain fraction from the bottom to the top. And then by the way, the same thing happens with the way down. The directives that are given from the top have to be they have to be relatively simple because as they go down There's a an expansion of scope, which increase the ads basically noise, because the new person down below has to add a whole bunch of specificity to it to be done. And it gets it gets handed down, you get more and more noise. And so the This means the top the directors that come that have very broad and simple. And at the bottom, the divergence between actually happens out in the world, what was intended in the topic is actually quite large. So you've got a lack of elegance and precision, and you get a compression going up. And so this means that it has certain capacities, it can actually get us the moon turns out that's a domain that's well within the scope of what it can do. It cannot solve climate, full stop period. And there's a lot of other things that can't solve. So that's one boundary condition. The other boundary condition is to this transition between broadcast and digital, which is happening. So the blue church gave us digital, right we move from an analog world to a digital world during its period of being chart and When I say digital here, I want to say very specifically what I mean is network, symmetric, decentralized. So it's the fact of that being digital is important is actually very, very important. But it's not the thing that I'm focusing on right here. 
I'm comparing broadcast to this network decentralized, not analog digital. By the way, both are true, but we're just going to focus at the network broadcast piece. So what happens is, is that a network intelligence and network system for sense making and choice making is different? Full stop this just start there. It's just different and has different capacities as different ability to take information from the edge process and make choices and disseminate actuation back out to the edge. And it's more available to solve all the problems that we're dealing with. It's a kind of collective intelligence topology that is fundamentally more available to be able to address complex Systems problems, how our brain works, for example. But to use a kind of a developmental metaphor if the blue church is a really, really sophisticated developed and mature, aging boxer, the new digital collective sense making is a four year old. Alright? So he's got good genes, you can see he's gonna be good when he gets strong and gets bigger, maybe when he's 14, you'll be able to punch this guy out. But in the meantime, was that for you? But in the meantime, it's not really a match. If you look at it and say, Hey, wait, in terms of lifting heavy weights, blue church is gonna win. In terms of being able to answer a lot of questions, at least appear to be able to answer a lot of questions, the boutrous looks like it's quite robust. If you take a look at the emerging, decentralized collective intelligence that's beginning to happen on the internet. Mostly looks like gaps. It mostly looks like it's doing stuff in the gaps that are being left behind. But the Bluetooth doesn't like you can do anything holistic. And when it's endeavor to do something holistic, like so the Q and on phenomenon, it looks insane. And it kind of is, if you've ever seen an absolute newborn baby in his body, it's insane. his limbs are flailing wildly. Its heads rolling around, his eyes are rolling in his head, because he hasn't figured how to wire itself up yet. That's what's happening in the network collective intelligence. 
So there's a gap, there's a transition. But the whole new concept fruityloops want to do that when we can. There's very good reasons to believe that the blue church is done, meaning that it's in the senescence stage. And senescence has a characteristic where when you move into the senescence stage, you tend to go downhill pretty quickly. So I'm expecting this is a blue church, sort of increasingly, obviously Failing And increasingly, obviously, losing the habitual or unconscious or unspoken. position of being authoritative and being just reality, more and more people are going to be going, Ah, that's a thing. That's not the whole thing. It's a thing. And it's kind of doing something and maybe parts of it are still good, but it's not the whole thing. And it seemed to be increasingly fucked up. And in the meantime, looking around, okay, now what? That's the key. Right now we're in a space, we're in that space between 1918 and 1945. We're in the space between 1077 bc and 800 BC, where there's a gap between a coherent collective intelligence a coherent structure of being able to respond as a as a whole to what's happening and a new it, not an older nooner is it fading? So we're witnessing that transition. We're in the middle of it and a lot of the phenomenon that we've been experiencing over the past what 15 teen years or so, are of that sort, starting around 2000 ish. Particularly accelerating, you can explain a lot of the things that happened that seemed very unexplicable like Brexit and Trump using this model. Partly it's about novelty building up behind the blue church and then exploding because I had nowhere to go.
Well, what we're to do with gaps in the blue church, so blind spots and actuation gaps, that's one side. So it can't do the things that it thinks it can do. And it doesn't perceive as lots of things that can't proceed, kind of willfully actually. Now, on the flip side, the rapid evolutionary development of capacity in what I'm calling the red religion, or the decentralized collective intelligence, just to make it very clear, it's not the right relationship happens to be an instantiation of a way of solving the problem. So there's a developmental curve, this idea of rate in state is pretty good here. So blue church state of since making choice making actuation, high rate down, it's getting less effective over time. decentralized collective intelligence, date, low rate high. So there's going to be a crossover point, when we see is on occasion we'll see a breakthrough where this new thing has reached a point of criticality where its capacities are now good enough to show up is actually effective in the visceral world, Visa v. The fading legacy. I think now it's actually becoming relatively commonplace to kind of see the struggle between blue church normative good opinion and new structures of sense making new structures of meaning making a new church structures with how those are beginning to try to cohere into actually sovereign collective intelligences that are able to do the whole The whole thing, but we're a bit of the ways there for sure. It'll take certainly single digit years and possibly double digit years for the whole thing to come together to a point where it's transitioned formula.

Int 1:11:16  
We talked about discernment and how that's a key skill in decentralized media compared to broadcast media. Oh, absolutely. So, now the conversation which I think is really nice is turning to now what and how? So the answer now, what is decentralized collective intelligence? Great, how do we do that?

Jordan 1:11:39  
So I said first step is know that you don't know. No, the most of your habits are blue church habits. In fact, most you haven't seen gay habits, but let's just leave it at Blue church right now. And certainly everything you've been formally taught and everything you've learned from formal institutions. Almost all those are going to be wrong. So you have to actually step into a pretty child's mind place. And, as a rule of thumb, still very slowly, and don't try to come to doing come to action very quickly. Step by step, you have to learn was it you have to stand before you walking to walk before you run? And this is very much developmental. So within that context, what are some of the core capacities that are part of our developmental stage for this to actually be able to move this to centralize collective intelligence forward? And one of the core capacities is discernment. And I will distinguish discernment from, say, judgment or good opinion. So, and oh, and here, I'd like to actually invoke the distinction between thinking and simulated thinking. So let me just do that distinct from the quick and then come back Back to discernment. So, if you remember that a lot of the way of thinking about the fundamental structure of game a, and in this case, specifically the structure of the blue church is computational in nature. There's a schema of information, which is simply true. And your job is to simply learn it as a schema, like know the map, and to be able to repeat it back with fidelity. And if there if then statements to be able to execute on identifying what's the pattern that is present, and then execute on the that. 
So if I say red, press the red button, your job is to be able to know that I said red. And then to press the red button, that's a computational function bureaucratic gave me and when I'm in that mode, there's a optimization for being able to do that, which is to be able to do so quickly and fidelity, I want to become a really good computer, I want to be able to recognize, do pattern recognition against the patterns that are available very rapidly and never get it wrong. And then I want to be able to output the appropriate output very rapidly. It was high fidelity. And if you ever played the game where you did math challenges where a kid would stand up the kid next to me stand up the teacher would show like four times for and whoever said the answer, right got to move is called around the world. That is this precisely right. Your job is to know your math tables down pat, to be able to see four by four before the other kid is even figured out what the board says. You're saying eight, that is a simulated intelligence optimization function. And then this other side thinking from similar to thinking to thinking, thinking is a very different gig. Thinking is what's so different I have to actually slow down even begin to articulate it. For example, we absolutely have no idea What's going on? Thinking is helpful, which is necessary. It's what you do. You have to be able to perceive a lot. I perceive subtly and multimodal, like to be able to use your eyes and ears and anything else you happen to have as much as possible. And you want it to be very available to novelty, which means you don't want to close what you're proceeding on something that you think you think it is, you don't want to impose a structure from your framework. 
What is real? So if you're walking through the woods, and you hear something in the bushes, if you imagine it's a horrible monster, and you panic, you're engaging in simulated thinking. If instead you stop walking, You listen and look, and you don't have any preconceived notion of what it what it is, you know exactly, you know, which is that I heard something and no more. And you tune yourself to just become increasingly capable of perceiving reality as fully as possible. And then as that reality reveals itself in clarity making use of that and nothing more. I have just seen a flash of orange, I haven't seen a tiger. I just jumped to a conclusion that imposed sense making on reality. I just saw a flash of orange. Okay, what else? Oh, it's up there. Oh, I also heard chirping Oh, it's a to catch, right? you slow down and allow the perception to really settle in and you allow your mind to even be quite open and fluid you're in a flow state and to use that language. The closer you are to a flow state and the more you are able to engage an insight, which is to say not be in the box, but actually be perceiving reality with a lot of fluidity to That's real thinking. Okay. And so discernment is the, the the use of sensing, in very, a very subtle way, nuance and subtlety, and a broad net of sense, particularly through like your whole instrument. Noticing, for example, that you actually do have a lot going on, you're not just eyes and ears, you're several billion years of biological evolution had to fucking survive in the wilderness using whatever it had, and didn't throw out the good stuff. Right. So all of that is here, and it's all more or less fully integrated into a very effective sense making coherence as an individual. Social discern it to be able to tune to attune your full perceiving and sense making instrument and to be able to use that fully in the context of reality without having any pre judgment collapse that listening Then notice when some kind of quality of feeling shows up. And now to actually explain that if we go a little bit deeper, let's make a distinction.
We keep having to make these distinctions because the world's gotten a lot of face world's been very sloppy, frankly, and making meaning of what's going on. So I want to make a distinction. That's both we all know in cognitive science between emotions and feelings, and feelings and thoughts. So, and dimarzio is the guy who I first learned this from I'm not using his particular framework, but it's where it first came from. For me, so an emotion is a very physical shift in disposition, poised for action. Okay, so you feel the emotion of fear you're poisoning body to fully. And as you begin to feel the building of that energy, what you're actually feeling is a whole bunch of stuff going on in your body that is beginning to shift the entire disposition of your body and mind by the way, to be able to change from sitting around to running rapidly. If you are feeling a building of an energy to begin to engage in conflict to fight, we call that emotion, anger. There's not that many emotions, and they are systemic and very biological, physical.
Feelings are completely different. We actually feel our emotions so we can get confused. We feel fear, as well as in fact actually experienced or have fear. But a better way of grasping feeling would be something like you're trying to stack a rock on top of another rock and you're trying to notice whether or not the Rock is balanced. That's feeling a very integrative, systemic, subtle and nuanced use of many, many, many different kinds of sensing and actuating simultaneously, that are way beyond the capacity to do it analytically standing, you know that it's a complex problem standing on two legs, nonetheless, you have to be able to use all these different muscles, you know, hundreds of muscles involved, and be able to sense whether you're, for example, your knees buckling, or are you falling to the left to the right, if you watch a one year old, try to stand you see how many failure conditions there are, you get this big thing on top. It's actually rather ungainly. You have to figure how to hold that appropriately. Standing is a feeling thing. The feeling of being balanced, is what I mean by feeling. And then we can move that to a higher level of action. If you've ever shot a basketball, there's a feeling of shooting a basketball, you've trained your body to be fluidly able to execute an extremely complex effort of moving a sphere. From here to there. Possibly while being guarded by other people and in the air in the fucking thing goes in. That's feeling right now, thought is something that happens in a much narrower bandwidth conscious thought in particular, like if you're actually your conscious awareness is measured in bits, not the many, many, many megabytes of information Have you process to having the least amount of like standing up. And so to the thinking process is a very distinct kind of thing than feeling as much more associated with this simulated thinking to be honest. simulated thinking is in fact, when you just take thinking it to be the whole thing, and you don't allow feeling to participate meaningfully in the equation. 
Implicit thinking is deeper. So if you think about implicit thinking, the way that john talks about it, where you have his number, he would even describe that experiment where you had the series of alphanumeric codes that were like 10 digits long so it was not the kind of thing that was available thinking is larger than working memory and you had a series of them and at had an algorithm to define what they were if you were to be able to figure that out in a chance. But then when shown other hexadecimal codes, some of which did use that algorithm a match the pattern, some of which you didn't, you could kind of tell much better than 50% much better than random. But if you ask people, how did you know? The honest answer was, I have no idea. But I felt it. That's what I'm talking about. Okay. So there's a functional capacity to be able to use the whole thing. By the way, the whole thing here to write this, this whole brain includes a whole bunch of stuff, of which the prefrontal cortex is this super cool, awesome, tiny bit. But, you know, the visual cortex and the cerebellum are actually doing a whole lot of work. So being able to use the whole thing to make sense of what's going on. That's the beginning of discernment. Right? So you learn how to come into a tournament, you learn how to bring your body into alignment with your mind, and to use that whole thing to perceive and then You allow feeling to emerge, which is the appropriate modality for this kind of thinking. By the way, this is true in any type of the source. So discernment, for example, is how you do art. You want to be able to express yourself artistically, you first feel a feeling with clarity. And the you allow that feeling to become expressed with skillfulness. Which takes time of course. And it's done by the way, a feeling, you feel the feeling, and then you take a color. And you notice whether or not that color corresponds with the color feels like the feeling. You have to get good at noticing that correspondence like balancing rock. When you get good at it. You can now put a color on a piece of paper that feels like the feeling. And then you actually look at what the line has the feeling and the feeling of adventure. You're a painter. So discernment, attunement.
Feels feeling clarity. So now you have to actually have this sense of when a feelings actually come into clarity when there's a Yep. To me at least, it kind of feels like everybody's checked in that there's an internal consensus to whatever degree, my ability to perceive and make sense of what's happening, has done it again. Not a whole lot more is going to emerge. And there's something about this that has a yes next to it where I can say, like, I'm Yes, I'm balanced. I'm not falling over right now. Yes, the rock is going to stay. It's a good, it's great practice. Just put a rock on top of another rock. And notice you can in fact feel when it's gonna stay, and you can do with another rock. Maybe you do seven rocks. Same idea, and you've got clarity. Yep, it's balanced. Take a step back. So you build clarity. The deep thing here, by the way, is what happens next is you can actually at that point, have insight. Just by the way she might practice back to john stuff, which is in this place of clarity. Whatever it is, that is coming clean. You may have a capacity to actually learn how to express something now the thought comes back in, that is new, you may have actually changed yourself in some way in relationship to what's happening. And now because you've changed your capacity to do out in the world has changed. So now we'll take a break to just talk about this discipline, this concept of disturbing the context of decentralized collective intelligence. So in centralized broadcast, for example, collective intelligence is mostly judgment, you know, I have to be able to measure good opinion, I have to be able to know hierarchical relationships, I have to be able to output the appropriate output within the very narrow boundaries of what I'm allowed. I have a certain amount of artfulness that I can actually apply to the equation but it's mostly fitting it in the box and then popping up to the right place. Increasing yourself by the way underneath construction.
What's interesting, there's a huge meta story and be introduced. If you can actually figure out how to get this gigantic story to something that even vaguely hangs together. It'll be a neat trick because I'm about to jump to that just discernment and decentralize collective intelligence. But also remarkable notice what happens in response to niche construction and what the equivalent of new construction is in the domain of the remarkable so in decentralized collective intelligence, what ends up happening is is there's a signal to noise dynamic as things move through notes. So if you receive something from a note from from me, for example, I'm telling you this is actually here we are I'm telling you something I'm telling you something. If you listen to what I'm saying and in yourself are able to find that part of what I am saying. That feels true. feels right does not kick off emotions of greed or fight or flight or luster as it feels there's a quality to it. You've just you've built that quality of life, your level of capacity where you're like, I don't understand exactly what is being said here. And most of it seems like it's kind of weird or noisier, cringe worthy. But there's a thread here, that feels very strong. I'm going to separate that out. And now I'm going to skillfully express it back out. We actually have now is a positive feedback lead filtering system, if every node is doing that. And by the way, there's two recursion if every node is primarily focused initially on building us discernment and skillfulness in doing this process, right. 
Then what ends up happening is the network is fucking amazing. And making sense of subtlety. Right? can take the perception these subtle, broad implicit pattern recognizes that we're also gifted with and grab airy, vague and weird, not quite knowing what's going on thing, put it into the system. And after a couple of turns, it's actually reified to a very crisp clarity that can be shared. That's what we're doing. We're trying to accomplish this, that process. And you notice how much of a burden is placed on the individual. Now, it's not like the broadcast modality where most of your agency is limited to a very narrow band, and you're really relying on the causal structure that you're embedded in to do almost all the work in the decentralized collective intelligence for to actually work. Almost all of the agency is actually on the individuals, you have to have really, really effective responsible individuals. By responsible i mean is there, they're able to respond to the environment in the way that I'm talking about. They're not reacting, they're not shifting to a causal domain. You're not saying what they're supposed to say or rejecting because they're supposed to reject They're listening and refining, and doing the work of collaboration, and thinking about collaboration, how collaboration works, you and I are collaborating on a song. If we're partners, we're really collaborating. I'm going to be like, ah, and I just had this crazy sense, and I like to play it. terrible sound. But you're listening very closely. Right? And you're good at it. You're good at listening very closely. And you like, you know what, I like this, and you play it back. And when you play back is actually closer to what I'm feeling. Like, Oh, yes, more like that. More like that. And then like, Okay, and then this, but now I'm actually what the better because it's more clear to me because what you did was you would find it and express it back to me that I couldn't perceive myself. But once I saw it, pop that's inside. You just gave me an insight collaboratively collaborative insight. So now I take it now put something back to you. And now you're like, Oh, yeah, I totally get it and then you drop into it, and now we're now a collective intelligence coherences now happening in the fluid collaboration between us. And the things that can be produced are vastly more than when either one of us could have done separately. Now, of course, this requires that you have developed a certain level of discernment, I've developed a certain level of discernment, we're in a relationship that allows us to actually use that we can talk about that means what the requirements are. And then we've also built a certain level of skillfulness and expression. So that I'm not creating noise and expressing it I'm actually making it more signal when I express it more real, more true. I'm increasing the truth of the the expression of the quality. 
So it's a pretty like, I think, pretty concrete example that many people might be able to grasp. And the idea is that that's what we're doing. We're trying to figure out how to become real collaborators at scale. And we're getting better at it. We're actually learning it like we're noticing, for example, that our most natural humaneness has a lot of capability to separate bullshit from non bullshit authenticity from artifice. authenticity can at least feel true, man, I feel good. artists can do a really good job of feeling good, but art but authenticity can feel true. Even when it's kind of a clusterfuck, or even was not done exquisitely, particularly as hard. If it feels really true and authentic. There's something in there that you're basically deep humanists, like, all right, I can work with that. Where do we go from here? And by the way, I'm interested brother with his openness. Hey, you know, we're just figuring this out. I'm trying, what do you got? And you send it back to me, symmetrically, because we're available, and I listened. And I hear you, then we've actually created a relationship that has that feeling of trust in the relationship, which then creates an open channel to do more of it. Now, of course, we're late. We're limited. We're limited by discernment. So we're always going to have to be doing work on proving the quality of our discernment in all the modalities that happen to be happening. And we are limited by our capacity to express we have to get better and better being able to express with clarity, with elegance. And with almost its fidelity, meaning we don't want to put stuff in it that doesn't belong in it. I want to say something that is also subtly manipulative. 
I just going to tell the truth, pure truth two degrees in which I can, I'm going to fuck it up. But at least I'm not fucking it up with stuff that doesn't need to be there at all. So just expressing it. And what happens about that is very good news. And it's extremely powerful process. And the process of collaboration. It's available now because we're all connected to each other is unprecedented. And that has the capacity to solve all the problems we're dealing with. That kind of a decentralized collective intelligence, with high discerning individuals with clearly expressing individuals who are non ego quickly, meaning they are not adding subtly or unintentionally their own shit into the signal, but are actually simply endeavoring to Share what is authentically perceived by them to actually feel true back out with quality is in comprehensively capable of making sense and other way making choices and doing things. So much so that it's sort of absurd that we just don't go there. If you want flying cars and go to the stars, this will get you there. It'll solve everything, the amount of bandwidth is available inside that domain is enormous. The problem, of course, is that it's hard at an individual level. And it's counter current. And we've been trained for generations to do the exact opposite. We've been training for many, many, many, many generations to insert egoic content in between everything that we do. We've been changed for several generations to be simulating thinking, not thinking.
And so they'll relearn all that stuff. And we have to be doing it here first. Each individual has to be able to take the responsibility and then learn to trust their own discernment in relationship. You know, if I'm in relationship with you. And you are in fact, trying to manipulate me, I have to be in this really weird, widely vulnerable state of actually listening. But then noticing in myself as a feeling this little off, and then being able to respond to that as well. Ideally, to call it out and do this is a way for me to exquisitely invite you into a higher level of integrity in yourself in relationship, but also, perhaps sometimes just to be able to be able to make it safe for myself and for others. So that's it. That's the practice as far as I'm concerned. That is the thing that more or less everybody should be doing right now full time. And everybody who's good at it, should be doing it. More like it should show up. Like if you're if you are good at it. Other people should be noticing that you're good at it. And one of the things that they should be doing is notice sharing that fact, so that the collective intelligence begins the process of being able to point its attention away from say semi elation and artifice and towards truth and towards capacity building and growth, as opposed to exploitation and plunder. And, by definition, if you're attending to people who are helping you build capacity, you're building capacity. So these people are gonna do better. So it's actually a good choice for everyone is a better choice for everyone to be endeavoring to play this new game. And the more people who are playing it better, the more obvious that is, because the more actual visceral capacity is showing up over here, and there's a rate equation, it's exponential, by the way, that once it starts to hit, it starts to achieve criticality, escape velocity and just blows past this old structure very rapidly. So there we are, that metaphor of a four year old, where this is if you want to play basketball, you have an opportunity to draft the world. James he's for. It'll take a while before he's able to actually take you to the NBA championship. But the opportunity exists to him on your team right now, by the way, and Michael Jordan, they're all there. They're just on the playground. Therefore, they're not that good right now, but in a little while, they're going to be amazing. And maybe even at 12. Like, if you imagine, five of the greatest NBA players of all time playing as 12 year olds, might actually be a pretty frickin good team.
Just kind of that's it. That's the story.