Interviewer 0:05  
I'm really looking forward to this conversation. I just thought I'd give a little bit of background and maybe play a little clip from an interview. I think we did Jonathan, over a year ago now, where we were talking about the initial Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris debate and you made a really fascinating point about the phenomenology of consciousness. And I think I talked to Jordan about it very soon afterwards. And we like the seed was sown back then about maybe having a dialogue around this, this wider topic of consciousness and maybe the place that Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris got stuck. That could be the place where it's most fruitful to explore. So I'll just play that quick clip. Now.

Jonathan 0:46  
If I had a discussion with Sam Harris, I would just say, Okay, look, I know you don't like religion. I'm religious. That's fine. Let's not talk about that because gonna be a dead end. Let's talk about consciousness. Let's talk about that. And let's lay it out. Okay. What does a world Which consciousness is central? How does it lay itself out? How does it tension lay itself out? Right, it lays itself out in terms of hierarchies, terms of hierarchies, you have a point of attention. And then around that point lay the world kind of flows out into chaos, which is on the edge even in your visual frame. That's how it works, right? So you have points of attention and then on the edges, you have this chaotic space, which is, which is kind of gray and and not totally there. So you say Okay, so now, let's take that experience of consciousness. And let's say that that's the foundation of reality. That's what he says. He says, that's the foundation of reality. Well, is there an analog to that in a community? What does that look like? What does a commute What does the analog of consciousness in the community look like? It looks like it looks like gathering together around a point looks like turning around appointed. It's it's circumambulation. It's a hierarchy of social of structure, and it ends up looking like a religious ritual. That's what it looks like. Right? Because that's that's religious rituals are have the same structure as the structure of consciousness. So I think that and then what does that look like in time? What does the experience of consciousness look like if you see it with the frame of time, and what it looks like is a story. 

Int 2:20
Do you guys feel that the phenomenology of consciousness, like what the consciousness looks like as a story, is that the maze that could unstick this conversation, or how do you want to take?

Jordan 2:35
I mean, not to be instantaneously hyper meta, but the very first thing that happens is the fact that we're even conscious of the fact that we're talking about epistemology as a thing. I think that's already a piece of unsticking the conversation is actually having awareness of the underlying basis that gives rise to the constructs that we happen to be operating in. And just being willing to go down that stack as far as we need to go so so that we don't get stopped. on things that at least now in the in the contemporary world, we at least have, in principle, the capacity to have some facility with. So that was my the thing that got that I actually felt stuck by almost like choking on a bone, when listening to that conversation between Jordan and Sam, was the fact of kind of a christological just zooming past each other, right? And the inability to look at and say, Oh, wait a minute, we're actually instantiating orthogonal epistemologies. And there's no there's no basis to actually establish one as being the dominant epistemology. Yeah. So that's it. We're sort of done. You can see what do you do in that context? That's kind of interesting conversation when you do when you're in that situation, and exploring it but it felt like there there wasn't actually an ability to kind of step one level higher or deeper depending on your preferred metaphor, and have that conversation.

Jonathan 3:57  
One of the things that in terms of semi We're going to start with that conversation that I find fascinating is that to a certain extent, Jordan Peterson talks about consciousness talks about the phenomenology of consciousness quite a bit. And Sam talks about it as well in terms of in terms of the basis of the world that is he really has this meditative practice. He has this connection to Eastern practices. And so he has had mystical, it seems at least is what he said. He seems to say that he has had some mystical experiences where he's experienced his the bareness of his consciousness as this point, kind of this point of origin out of which the world kind of lays itself out or comes comes towards, you could say. And so what fascinates me is that he has that experience. He has that understanding, let's say of the basic of the basis of all our experience of being this first person looking around and experiencing the world, but He then jumps from that point to science. And so he says, here's the basis of existence, this is the only thing almost that we can say is real. And then he goes from there to this analytic mode, which is actually an alienated mode where you have to make the effort of alienating yourself from your first person perspective, and looking at the world in this flat way. Whereas, if to me with five fine strangers that he would if he was able to understand how, taking that point of consciousness as the origin, if you follow the steps, and then you understand that these consciousnesses, let's say, come together and stack up and that's how you build families. That's how you build larger units or, you know, that you build these distributed consciousness is whatever you want to call it, you know, cities, countries, identities that are larger than person and that the way that within yourself you function, the way the Parts and that those parts interact is the same as how that happens at higher scale. And that that's the same thing that happens in the story. That's how we create images, all of these human. All of the basis of human culture and human wisdom is there. And religion is part of it. So if you look at religious practice, you would see that procession processing, having sacred spaces where everybody gathers together and acts in the same manner, speaks the same words, or sometimes it can be a rhythm. In that speaking, there can be a back and forth between two sides and there can be a processing. All of these actions make a lot more sense if you understand them through the phenomenology of consciousness. But if you then jump to an analytic mode, where you analyze everything flat in terms of its atoms and its molecules and everything, then you look at the phenomena of religion and you think it's idiotic because it doesn't fit. It doesn't fit that way. It fits Through the through that other side so I don't understand how he's not able to. It's like there's a weird blindness in his in his approach to reality where he jumps from one to the other, and he doesn't not able to make the able to draw the line in order to get there. I don't understand. 

Int 7:15
to interject here before you start Jordan just because what I'm hearing when Jonathan says that, and I've not thought about this before, is coherence, like what he's talking about, like speaking the same words in a ritual together is feels like coherence being primary in terms of consciousness and then a shared experience of consciousness being somehow primary. I'm just throwing that in, because that relates to something we've been talking about quite a bit.

Jordan 7:42  
I get the feeling, bring that up later. I feel shooting it now is great and it can percolate. I think there's actually going to be a moment. I'm gonna do this. Watch, you ready? 37 minutes from now, where it'll be just right.
Alright, so the thing that I was noticing that was actually kind of peeking my curiosity and felt like maybe most helpful most useful is actually should inquiry into into that that notion How is that happening? Because it raises the question the bait the general question of how does the mode or the way that a given mind and by the way making a distinction here mind the way a given mind grasps or approaches, the questions that that arise for it. So, in this case, we're talking about Sam Harris, or at least the particular caricature of Sam Harris that we're playing with the sandbox Sam Harris will be poking at as having this interesting, certainly from our perspective. By the way, I share this perspective. This odd characteristic of starting at first person but then as Soon as thinking begins, it immediately flips to an obligate third person perspective. And I recommend specifically obligate third person which is to say, without a conscious choice like it's an unconscious almost like a structural characteristic that forces the entire awareness capacity, the ability to perceive what is real, into that obligate point of view. such that it even because of that, the ability to actually be aware of or notice the curiousness the almost the feeling, I have a feeling of like the disorienting feeling of moving from first person to third person without any step in between. So as much as stuff that right because the but the notion of like the distinction between consciousness and mind, the notion of of what mind is and how it actually emerges, how one might go about having this notion of having an obligate perspective and how that would happen and why it might happen. And even possibly thinking about it in terms of given where we are now. who we are as humans in the world, the cultures that we're in and the things that we're facing, is there a way for us to actually be conscious of how we design mind, so that the mind that we are using to apprehend world is most suitable to the world that we find ourselves in?

Jonathan 10:17  
Hmm. When you say design mind, do you mean by design your own mind, design people's mind or design by artificial intelligence?

Jordan 10:27  
Well, interesting, I did not think about the third, but that definitely comes up, doesn't it? I was initially thinking about the first and then as you were, you know, bringing me to into more inquiry, the question of parenting becomes almost immediate. So one might assume that most minds are developmental they are developed in the process of coming into be becoming of a person. And so whether we're being intentional about it or not, we are contributing meaningfully to the mind that a given child that we happen to be parenting, as Yeah, so I feel like the first and second feel very nice to me. The third, frankly a little bit scary for me 

Jonathan 11:10
Well, in terms of in terms of a child, I think that the best way to train a mind is love it. The idea of this is related to what I'm talking about in terms of the notion that consciousness stacks up, or that person stacked come together in terms of communion. And so the idea of that communion is the way to train the mind that being in a relationship with someone, that's the real way to train the mind that by attending, you know, by paying attention to something by you know, treating them treating something treating a child is important and and when you do that, Then you have two sides, which will appear right away, one is a side which is to encourage what is what is wood encourages the communion and then the other would be to discourage, you know, a right and a left hand, right hand to bring closer and the left hand to move away. And that actually is training the mind in how to how to interact with the world that is when we interact with the world, we have those same two tendencies, which is the tendency towards one and the tendency towards many you know, the perceiving the one and receiving the many, when you're raising up a child, that's what you're constantly doing in terms of the child, you're, you're you're constantly showing the child what is straight and what is crooked, you could say, and the child will have to explore what is crooked as well, they'll have to, you know, it's part of doing it but then they'll also see the consequences of the crooked and the consequences of the straight all this and so to me, that's how you that's how you you train the mind and it comes back to this idea that the The first reality of human people is, is people like we, we we, the first thing we care about is other minds, other people. That's what we care about first. I hope that makes sense.

Jordan 13:12  
Well, there's a couple of things that come up I mean, what I would say is the part of my preferred way to be in dialogue is to make sense together. So the degree to which there's a material for sense making in front of us, I feel called to step it like stepping with my, I guess you're a sculptor. Right? Well, for whatever reason, I had a metal working metaphor come to me, I apologize if those who don't go to whether you can get it well. What popped in my head was this really nice play on words, which is attending rather than pretending. Because what I've noticed is that many parents, and I have meaningful experience in this pretend to attend. And that is really problematic. And this I think, is a characteristic of a particular kind of mind. So we now have an interesting feedback loop, which is that first question how do you actually shift your own mind, so that a habit of pretending is actually able to be replaced by an actual lived attending, which then gives rise to the possibility of then that relationship with your child that we've identified as perhaps being the way to help them develop their mind?

Jonathan 14:19  
Yeah, yeah. And that's when practices like practicing attention itself in the Christian mystical tradition, you have this idea that there's a tension, and then there's memory, you always have to remember yourself. That is remembering God and remembering death, you can say remembering the two extremes and when you do that, then you don't get distracted, well, we end up it happens anyways. But if you're capable of keeping attention and keeping memory. Not remembering things in the past, but remembering the sense of staying connected to something. So you're in this state of attention and memory, and then you it's more difficult but it's then you won't pretend or if you do. Haha, yeah, it'll be malicious. If you do, it will be even worse if you pretend when you're attending, because it'll almost be immoral because you'll be doing it out of yeah, I would say be profane.
Yeah. Because when if you will, usually we're distracted. That's why we don't attend to our children because it's like we're there with children, but we're thinking about our job or think about whatever other problem, some stupid thing someone said on Facebook or whatever. And then you know, we're not there. And and I think, but I do think that being there like giving a child attention for like, 10 minutes, like actual real attention. I mean, you can feed a child, that child like actual real attention I've noticed that if I can do that with my kids like 10 minutes a day, they're happy then after that, it's like everything is together. But if I can just like focus for 10 minutes, then real real attention, then they know that that you care and they know that they're part of the family.

Jordan 16:17  
Well, here I flag violating my own principles, coherence. There's something there. So just to kind of make the ding or the sound of the tone in the in the ether was something that there's a few things. Oh, I was just reading with my wife, rereading Dan Siegel's book on the whole brain child, one of our we have a 11 month old brother now. Yeah, okay. And one of the commitments that we've made, we actually went through a program called parenting a spiritual practice twice. That's produced by us and some Canadians. And one of the things that came out of that was an introduction dance. seagulls working snow made a commitment to reread that periodically just to kind of keep the, his good heuristic out of you know, his work. But no, the very good concrete, like, here's ways to deal with being in relationship with a child's mind. And one of the distinctions he makes is between implicit and explicit memory. And I think it was a there was an interesting, it's not a it's not a mapping, I'm not actually implying that the thing that you were saying, between a kind of remember that was like remembering things that are in the past, and it kind of remember there was a coming together. But there's an interesting connection, like a, like a tonal resonance between implicit and explicit. So explicit memory is what you were talking about in terms of remembering things in the past. So remember a few minutes ago, and David said that thing that's expensive memory, and it's interesting to even feel what it feels like to be in that mode of explicit memory that's like that, you know, the theater of the mind metaphor. implicit memory is the thing like you how do you ride a bike and there's a problem We learned how to ride a bike and you built it into your body, you embodied the capacity to ride a bike. And I think there's something very consonant between that that to, to embody the capacity to live in continuity with life, is I think very close to what you're talking about. So yeah, to the degree to which you have been healthy, you've actually become whole in yourself. So there's nothing in you this between you and and the life that you're in relationship with, then to be remembered would be to bring yourself back to bring your implicit memory, so that your implicit memory makes it not possible for you to be present to the moment fully.

Jonathan 18:40  
And in terms of tons of kids, I can see it. We homeschooled our kids. And now my daughter, she decided to go to school, she's 12 and we were really nervous at first because obviously you homeschool is different, you know, just the whole approach and it's more holistic. It's more about people and relationships, you know? And giving the giving the kids time to be really bored. You know, so that they thinking about stuff. And that, you know, my son picked up the piano because he was so bored. And he started playing three hours a day. And we're like, you know, it works. But it we were a little afraid of the academic part. Because, you know, we didn't have hammer on that as much as our daughter went to school and she did totally fine. Like, she's completely fine. You know, she has, she has, she has good grades she, she's doing well. And what I realize is it has something to do with what you were talking about in terms of, I think that what we gave her in homeschool was not so much a bunch of stuff to learn, but rather a way of being and a way of learning. That that's so that's the implicit part. It's like she knows how to learn. She knows how to be and so put her in any circumstance, she'll be fine. Like she might not even if she doesn't know something, she knows how to to be quiet and to listen and to catch the right pattern and then to to to quickly catch up. Because she can learn. And I was like, oh, okay, so that is like, okay, now I know why we homeschool. It's like I understand what the the advantage was, it was really giving them teaching them to be a person first and then you know, after that you can just let them loose and they'll do whatever, they'll be fine.

Jordan 20:17  
Yeah, yeah, there's a lot of cool things that like branches that are popping off as the conversation is opening up. The one that I think has the most feels to me like right now it has the most relevance was going back to the moment where the parent is attending the child and the way that the child has a relationship with with another person, in this case that we may even invoke with another consciousness. And then thinking about because you actually made a very specific reference and I'd like to, to bring it out to the wisdom and I'm going to do a twist so as inside so outside or as outside so instead, the notion of the, the first thing the child is in relationship with is their own. Interior, there's their the quality of the, of the way that they themselves are showing up in life. Of course, as a child at the end, for newborn, the distinction is not a distinction. So even the process of actually being able to sense the difference between what is them and what his mom, for example, is the first thing. And so in a very lived way, one of the very first practices that we were we practice my wife and I with our infant, this came from the program that I mentioned was before we would pick her up, or before we would give allow anyone else to hold her, we would just create a structure like this, your hands open, and then give her the time which as it as a newborn, but within two or three weeks, it actually began to land to sense that something was that there was a kind of a possibility of relationship in this case to be held and then to signal Whether or not that possibility of relationship was consented to like, is this a yes. And the point there is to actually create a feeling of the interior of the child the experience the implicit experience right now the conscious experience obviously we're talking about a one month old, but the implicit like I said, it's about a lot of noise, a lot of clarity of signal of what does it feel like in me when there is a feeling of yes to something? And so I've noticed that's actually been part of a staff like there's been a building of that too because she has an ability to sense in herself when she is would you say closer to or the head some terms like the many in this and the single. Yeah, the one of the many, this and then the straighten the crooked, right? is to actually in herself like Okay, so let's say it's like that. Ah, ok. Cool. Is that first person third person distinction? No, not crooked that straight third person top down visual came to tell the pattern but rather, as you're looking at straight and crooked, are you always able to feel in yourself what your self is actually telling you how to make that distinction was that distinction feel like in us so that when you come across it in any context now without having to do this sort of weird semantic mapping, you actually able to just look at and go, Oh, I've never experienced this before my life, but I'm pretty sure that's in the direction of strangeness.

Jonathan 23:27  
Yeah, yeah. And you don't even think it, it just happens. That's why it's so interesting that so much of what we are is just about being with other people. And it's just about, I say that I'm on YouTube, and I'm talking and I'm explaining stuff to people, so I don't think there's anything wrong with that. But so much of what we are is just this. We're communal beings when we're meant to be together and we learn from each other and so you can kind of understand the idea. You know, of a saint or a star at you know, like a spiritual guide or something, this notion that even just being in with someone who has attained a certain moral level or a certain spiritual level, that can transform you they can, it can change you just by being in contact with somebody because a lot of it is implicit. It's like, you're not, it's not so much. It's not just the idea of getting a teaching from somebody, but it is a it is somewhat how like imbibing their being. And so then once you kind of get that you can understand why people want to go to rock concerts, why people want to meet, you know, stars and all this stuff. It's, it's a caricature, in a way. It's not a caricature, it's the actual thing, but it's, it's a bit maybe a little bit debased version of the desire to be with holy people or to be with someone who is manifesting something in the world. You know, it's like this, this person is theirs. They're they're just, I mean, I would say that I think that seeing what happened during Peterson to me, I saw something That were, it was it was like, because he wasn't really sometimes he wasn't even saying much like, he keeps repeating the same things, obviously, you know, I mean, if you've done 1000 shows, he's like you, you're obviously repeating, you have to repeat yourself. You can't just be always saying you things and, and and then people just want to be there in the room and be in the room where he's saying the same thing that he said, you know, 10 times on his YouTube channel. And so it's like, that's when you realize just how much so much of knowledge and so much of who we are is just about, that's why I use the word love because it's about this actual connection with somebody. It's more than just propositional.

Jordan 25:39  
Oh, nice. You invoked it. I was wondering like that propositional down to participatory. By the way, I'm just gonna keep calling him Johnny V because I hope that it entered into the common vernacular that Johnny V brought like I didn't have that those concepts before. I watched his stuff. And I feel like that's just a really nice, concrete but fundamental way of just helping understand that there's just such a distinction. Yeah. And, and yeah, I myself have personally had the experience many times, just of imbibing another person and noticing, by the way, that, you know, if you're in a particular moment and you're having a conversation with someone, the thing that is happening at the propositional level, while it may or may not be the intention, like right now, like the conversation that we're having, explicitly at the propositional level, is almost certainly the least important thing that's actually happening. There's a lot more going on and if and I've noticed that if I like watch the comments, but obviously right everybody who's watching something, or reading something or participating in something is absorbing the piece that is most in Bible by them, for which they have the most thirst and for which they have the most taste.

Jonathan 26:57  
Yeah, I've been watching the John Vervaeke stuff quite a bit. So maybe I would like to, to think about some of the things that he's talking about, especially if you just talked with them, I'm probably going to be doing more discussion with him, maybe an event, even here in Canada. So it's something that I've been thinking about quite a bit. I really appreciate the language that he's giving in terms of, and I think he really understands a lot of the a lot of the problem, especially the problem of progress. I don't know if he sees it that way. But he understands the the, the myth of he doesn't understand it, but he's describing something which can help people understand why progress is so problematic, because it's always like you're gripping, and then you're letting go. And so if you grip too tight, then you let go, you have to create this OPT. We call this optimal grip or whatever. And everything is like that, where there's this optimal grip, but it's always changing and it's out you always have to kind of shift it in order to move it. And so you'll hear politicians say things like, you know, we have to centralize centralizing Is the progress and then they'll centralized and decentralized. They'll exaggerate. Then once they've centralized so much, and they see all the downsides of centralization, lack of particularity lack of attention to to particular problem. They're like, no, we need to decentralize everything. And decentralizing is progress. 
And they don't understand that that it's always there, that trade off. Like if you want the medical system to be completely centralized into one gigantic state run thing, then yeah, it's going to be efficient is going to do all that. And then at some point, you're going to run into all the problems, the particulars, you want to decentralized. It's going to be dealing with everybody's local problems, and it's going to be great. It's going to be super expensive. And then it's also going to lack cohesive discussion between the experts like you just can't avoid that problem. It's just and so that's that. That's why the that's one of the reasons why why progress is Is it to me as an illusion, especially like social and moral progress. It's always finding that optimal grip, there's a great quote by Rumi, which I really find beautiful. He talks about, I won't quote it directly, he talks about how, if you keep your hand open, or your hand closed, you know, that's paralysis, like you're paralyzed, your hand needs to slightly open and closed, like the wings of a butterfly. And that is how you exist in the world. It's like this, always this in breathing in breathing out, you know, that's the rhythm of existence. You can't just breathe in and think that you're, I'm progressing, I've got more air and I've just keep adding more air, more air, and it's like, it doesn't work that way. You have to, you have to breathe out. And so I think that that the language of this kind of optimal grip stuff that he talks about, I find it extremely useful for people to understand. Know why complexity looks the way does why efficiency isn't always the answer. You know, that The idea that you can make a robot that's more and more efficient that somehow you think that you're going to solve the problem, like no, because as it becomes efficient, then you'll have the problem. The other problem, which is the problem of all the particular questions, all the exceptions, all these things that that are real and that you have to deal with. Yeah, anyways, that's the stuff I've been thinking about just because I listened to some of his podcast today and yesterday. So I was like, that's what it's about.

Jordan 30:28  
Well, the thing that my mind turned to, there's a lot of things I was noticing, for example, I'm not sure if any of this abundance even vaguely interesting or useful, but in any event is where we are. As you were talking, I was noticing in, in my in my mind, different frameworks that were kind of loading up to potentially make sense. So for example, is you're talking about centralized and decentralized healthcare. And I was actually I was actually loading up a paradigm in graph theory and network theory. That's actually able to do a really good job making sense of that particular thing. It's almost like, you know, as we're talking, there's a sense of like, flipping through the toolkit. So flipping through the the, the lenses or even maybe the the tones of the instruments Okay, where are we are Where are we? Where are we to be present to what's happening now. And I was just noticing like, as I was sitting there is actually noticing that was building up inside of me. And then the thing that dropped was actually kind of looping back to this question of our of our sandbox of our this character who has a has an obligate set, ways of mind, sort of a pretty progressive mind and in the sense that you're using meaning that there's a, an over efficiency and over over fit and over optimization, for a particular way of being in relationship with the world. And in particular one that seems to have actually lost this ability, right? So there's two, there's two problems. One problem is if you're this all the time, that's problem one. Problem two is when you've actually forgotten that you could ever do this. So it gets used as a metaphor. And we had this funny thing where we had this moment where in the very beginning sandbox, Sam has first person consciousness as the base. And then moment to start number one, like from zero to one, it just goes like that. There's nothing in between. So there's something about that there's something about you even say, Well, this is in some sense, obvious that the exact kind of culture that generates politicians who operate in this way because there's a co evolutionary dynamic, generates individuals who have minds that operate in this way. And there's a lot of really good rich stuff that if we wanted to, we could double click on and explore both the history of how we got here, the parameters of why we got here in the way that we did. And then of course, the the choice that we Might, what might it mean for us to find a way out of where we are, which I would say is a bit stuck, like the kind of mind and the kind of culture that shows up in this way, has a lot of stuckness. Because, you know, if it turns out somebody's throwing a baseball at you and having a hand that can't close, you're gonna have a very hard time catching it.

Jonathan 33:17  
One of the things I think one of the problems is that God is stuck, to me, we've accepted the revolutionary idea that culture is opposite. Let's say that true culture is oppositional, then you know, the artist is an oppositional figure that all culture is there to oppose. And, you know, the rock, rock and roll punk rock aesthetic, all of that is what we've accepted. And so we all understand the world I mean, it's it's not just it's not recent, you know, it's Marxism it's, it's even, even before marks, you know, this idea of this kind of radical dialectic. We've accepted the idea that the world works through Through up through opposition. And so because of that, what happens is people will flip like people can actually flip from one to the other, they don't even realize but they still are always inhabiting this kind of oppositional is kind of oppositional mode. And, and especially, and democracy is part of that creates that issue too. Because you end up you inevitably end up having two parties. And then you have in the US is like such a picture, perfect image. It's like it is country to split 5050 right down the middle. It's almost like a, it's like a, it's almost like a cosmic image where if you set up two opposites, well, that's what's going to happen. It's going to sit up in the middle and people are going to take one side, if you're going to take the other even sometimes the sides aren't even coherent in themselves. Like if you look at the positions that all the republicans hold, they're not actually totally coherent. And the end the democrats are not totally coherent, but the just swallow one side and the other and then it's just we have to, we have to fight.

Jordan 34:55
What's meaningfully coherent is their critique of the other side. The story they tell about the other side's weaknesses is the most coherent part of their platform.

Jonathan 35:05  
Yeah. And so I mean, the ancient way was dangerous in a different way. Because usually coherence would be on the inside, and the opposition will be on the outside. So you know, you have, you have the Roman Empire, and if you're Roman, and if you're, if you're, if you're an actual Roman citizen, you're right in the center. And if you're kind of periphery, peripheral to the Roman citizens, then you're a little further out, and then you know, then you have people that are a little further out and then finally have the barbarians that were fighting and that we're trying to fight off. And so there's that that coherence shuts itself up in the hierarchy, and the opposition happens towards the outside. And so that has a very dangerous and dangerous aspect because you end up dehumanizing those that are outside, but now with that with democracy and it kind of dialectical thinking would we've end up creating is the enemy within it. So it's like it Inside your thing, you set up an opposition. And so then your enemy is your neighbor. And so man that is that is a it seems like that's a dangerous place to stand especially if it ramps up if it if it stays at the low level just discussion it's not a big deal but as we're watching it ramp up. Yeah, it's a frightening to me.

Jordan 36:20  
I've seen some very good arguments. I've seen some very good arguments that it inevitably ramps up. Yeah. Because as you say, it's almost like the, the paradigm that popped up for me to kind of make sense of that initially was the notion of a evolutionary landscape. And so there's like a niche, a really high quality nice over here in left space, really high quality nice up here in right space. And there's a niche construction, where if I'm in right space, the more I moved to the right once it's like a stable, ultra stable place and right space like in America is like Eisenhower Republicans. The the far There's a slightly farther right version of that is ever so slightly more fit, as long as it's able to distance itself from that which further left as a built in pressure to select for more and more polarization. Yeah, because it just keeps that middle which is really the actual danger to the, to the, to the dyadic structure. What I was wondering was if there's a way to imagine what else in real time right now.

Jonathan 37:35
Besides a King David, or Queen? I joke but I think that the idea of having characters or or having characters that transcend the political I think that that's the key so I say a king or queen. Yeah, it can be that and it has been in the past not that that's not problematic, but it can be saints to it can be holy people that that are that stand above the fray. You know, There was a time, for example, in the US where someone like Billy Graham, for all the criticism that I could, you know, I'm not a particular fan of Billy Graham, but someone like Billy Graham actually stood above politics. And he would meet with with presidents on both sides. And he represented a kind of father figure for the nation. And everybody could agree that Billy Graham's a good guy, you know, even if I don't agree with them, and and so it feels like the current state, let's say, and maybe like in America, maybe one of the things that actually played that role for a little while was, was kind of entertainment. I think it's a it's uh, it's once again, it's a database version. But uh, you know, you had these, let's say, the talk show host of, of the Johnny Carson talk show host type, where he was speaking to everybody, and everybody could tune into Johnny Carson, and could watch Johnny Carson and there was no politics. There was no there was no polarization in the in the talk show. It doesn't mean that people Didn't have their polarized views, but it just wasn't there. And so now it's weird because now even in entertainment, things have polarized really strongly in terms of mostly left on the left. But now we're seeing you know, with with, with certain movements like alternative media and comics gate and all this stuff, we're seeing this this other side which is which is coming about and is is getting the day it's getting bigger.

Jordan 39:27  
So my friend Zach Stein, his thing is education, and meta psychology, which is very consonant with Johnny V's vision of fourth generation, cognitive sciences, as I understand it. And one of the quotes in his recent book actually has to to precise with this notion that in the states in the US, as the place the locus and I was at a proper locus, for the cultivation of meaningfulness and connectedness which is to say, the family most most most meaningfully, and then to the community, the lived community, secondarily evaporated. There was a mapping or a grasping for that in media and school, which is a uniquely bad place to locate that particular developmental need. Yeah. And also having grown up in America in that context, born in 71. I mean, I remember the time when you would go to school and we would all just talk about the TV show that we all watched. So there was a way to maintain and it's almost like a Roman style coherence, as you say, there's a notion of Okay, we're the in group because we all watch the show, we can all talk about the same. Almost like mythopoetic structures we share we're keeping up to space up to date on the meta narrative that is our our culture, our poor, pitiful, commercialized and poorly written culture starring David Hasselhoff, but nonetheless, it's something Something coherent. And then as you and both at a media level because of the deconstruction of narrow broadcast channels, and moving into cable and eventually into the Internet, and also at the level of the sort of the continuous metabolism of meaningfulness into acrimony, it seems to just be built into the heartbeat of the way the particular structure of our culture is designed, has also done that. So it's polarized, so it's fragmented and then polarized. So even those things that are not at all good for holding and convey meaningfulness are now also absent, which I think is a pretty good finger to point in the direction of the media crisis. 

Jonathan 41:43  
Yeah, and it's interesting I was you said that I was, I kind of was reminded that one of the places that the Romans tried to find that's a togetherness was in their entertainment. So I mean, the circus for all It's horrible. That's was a way I mean, because although it was violent entertainment, just like our entertainment is violent, was a way for Romans to, to be together right? It would to to to experience the same catharsis at the same time and so it was you know, as the Romans became less religious, you know, especially after, after Augustus and things started to kind of to fragment there at that at that time. It seems like the circus was a place for them to to come together, but it's a fragile, you know, the idea of finding yourself in entertainment. It can last a little while but I don't think it's strong enough. 

Jordan 42:38  
Yea I like a mapping right now to a guy and often in Carroll Quigley. He was a historian in the mid century. He was a really good book called The evolution of civilizations. And one of the things he talked about is that the Golden Age is actually always the death knell of a civilization that has happened is that it's closed, it's optimized, become progressive, and it's totality is being exchanged for its for hypertrophication of the things that it identifies as success. So it gets a whole lot of, in this case, gold but it actually is losing vitality, losing meaningfulness, losing connectedness, losing religion in the deep sense. And yeah, I think that's probably there's a map in there, which is to say that almost at the at the moment, if you if you shifted at the center of the way that your society is maintaining its integrity, as a coherent culture, is living in the domain of media, you are already dead. may not use the body may not hit the ground for a little while. But that's really how big you are and what's going on, but death is already set in.

Jonathan 43:45  
Yeah, no, I totally agree. And I think that, you know, I mean, I think that it's interesting, because we probably wouldn't, it would have been too difficult for us to perceive it at the dawn of television. You know, we wouldn't, but now it's become so obvious and we can see See the trace, we can see the line from TV to Facebook. And we can see it breaking down and now it's like it's too late because we're all on Facebook. We're all on these social medias result when we see how, how, how they're a caricature of relationships and how they're alienating to our you know, I keep saying that Facebook is the ultimate version of the star system that we created with media and TV and movies and everything, where everybody is a mini star. It's like you, that's what it is. It's like you're you can have a little bit of stardom. And so you're not actually in relationship with anybody. You're just exposing yourself. And then everybody is watching you. They're not at you. And so they can comment on your thing, but they don't have to they you can expose yourself. And so it's exposing and voyeurism and it pretends to be actual community, but it's attending. Yeah, it's just a little form of stardom. And so it's shrunk down to the individual.

Jordan 44:59  
Yeah. Which you can imagine that that that has the characteristic of collapsing further and further until you're not even attending to yourself. Everything is performative, you're performing for yourself, you're performing for your friends, and it's all a simulation which another guy who just finally, like, grasp this guy named Baudrillard after about like stages or levels of simulation and how the levels of simulation convert into each other, and, you know, we get, we can kind of look back and say, Okay, we're at stage four, I can see three, two and one now because we've got enough perspective on it. But then you get back to the fact that this nice thing, at least for the moment, and I'm kind of like remembering AI, and once again kind of shutting it behind the door, we had 38 minutes yet. Is this return like the remembering that you talked about earlier is that is in some sense always available yet, even though we found ourselves alienated in every dimension, you know, this the suburbs and the TV are Part of the same machinery like you walk around and by the way where I live, you walk down the street, And ain't nobody out what are they doing inside? They're watching TV or staring at their phone. And that's it. So the capacity for people to live in a context where there's no human contact is only facilitated by the fact that they can get the simulacrum of human contact from media, but because they can get the senior accurate human contact from media super saliently, like okay, store is a lot more interesting to your neighbor, you'll go outside. So you get this positive or self reinforcing destructive cycle. But remembering is always available. And yeah, I sent a Renaissance. I mean, this is again, you point to Jordan Peterson I this is what I identify as being the most fundamental lesson of that that is the degree to which there was a recognition on the part of a very large number of people who are extremely thirsty to imbibe something that was real, that there was something real and maybe not for everyone, and maybe not completely real. But real and for the people who drank it, it was a thing they needed, which kicks something off.

Jonathan 47:05  
Yeah, I agree. I've seen it myself. I've seen people, you know, I can see it in their eyes, you can see the change that they're that they have this this like, little sparkle. And so that's great. That's wonderful. And it but it is, it's very, it's very difficult. And that's maybe that's one of the things that I struggle with in terms of Jordan, and in terms of Brett Weinstein and all these people. Is that maybe that's why also I'm the, the explicit Christian in this whole thing is that I don't see how his things stack how this stacks up, you know, and I'm really struggling to see how it stacks up because one of the things that they say Jordan talks about is the individual and I understand he says it and he doesn't do it in a in a kind of individualist sense he talked about how taking responsibility, you know, take responsibility for things and being an active agent in the world, fixing the things around you, your community and everything. And but it has to, it still has to stack up, it has to stack up to a higher degree. It's like, if you do that, let's say you, you fix your family and you do that, then there, those families also have to come together. And then those families have to come together, it has to go up higher. 
It has to come together in a higher sense. And so that's why I'm always invoking, I tried to invoke that a the medieval village as an image of a of an actual village of an actual town, which has a hierarchy in the very architecture of the town, where you have the highest point of the town is the church steeple. It's usually at the center of the town, the town gets built around this church, that's the place that's our That's it, like that's the highest point. That's what we all look towards. We know that that's what binds us together. And so we go there. To be bound to to experience a common identity, and then we go back into our homes and we reproduce that identity in our families. And then we reproduce that in ourselves. Now I'm going top down, I know, everybody's tried to go bottom up, that's fine. I'm not a problem with the bottom up. But I also think it's important to something describe it coming top down. So and I think that so that what that ends up looking like, to a certain extent, is identity, you can't get away from it. And so, the desire to so it's like, how, how can we deal with that? How can we deal with the reality of identities as this stacks up, and not ignore it, but then also not create the danger of the extreme? That's a rigid identity that we saw in, in 20th century nationalism. And so, but there but there has to be, it has to stack up towards identities. You can't just be a bunch of individuals and then have one What the state like have just this anonymous would post national state country like Justin Trudeau said about Canada's identity national. 
What do you mean when you say identity? Well, we'll want to like you. I mean, it can be like clans, exactly like religious identity, is like saying I'm a Christian, thesaying I'm a Canadian thing. I'm a French Canadian that I share a common history and come in with, you know, a common identity with other people, all these identities, they, they they, they are inevitable in in how the world stacks up. And so, I feel like no one, at least like in this ITW group, everybody wants to avoid identity because they're saying, you know, it has the sovereignty of the individual everything identities dangerous, that is dangerous. It's like you can't if it stacks up, you can't avoid it. So we need to find a balance we need to talk about how we can find a way to balance these identities without, because that's what let's say like, that's the biggest criticism coming from the extreme right for people like Jordan Peterson, they're saying you're ignoring identity, you're pretending like it doesn't exist. When it obviously it's going to exist, it's going to happen, but then they go way too far. And they're like, Okay, so now we're going to be, what is it like, right? You know, it's like the white race and all this all these To me, that's a bogus identity. But there are real identities in terms of cultural identities and, yeah, all that.

Jordan 51:31  
So here, I think, again, the word coherence probably is the way I would describe the thing that replaces identity that plays the role that I think is what you're talking about. And by the way, has particular that characteristic of top down. So it's, we might call the, what is it that enables things at the bottom to actually come together into things that happen I have an identity meaning a meaningfulness. As a unit a beingness as, as such, that is real, like actually effective in world and when we can be very concrete, it's like, if one of them gets old and infirm the other stick around and support them. Like that's, that's what it means for that to be a real thing Yeah. And then for that, to also be able to come together in in higher and higher levels of wealth factory just scale as you said in the, in the small family, the distributed family, the village, the, you know, we might call the the bioregion whatever it is right some structural element that has a vastness and all the way ultimately the the whole thing, the whole, the whole world which I think may or may not have been clear in the in the video that you watched that I talked about, but that's one of the things that I spend a lot of time trying to point out is that that's where we are like we're we're at a moment where it's no longer really an option of do we learn how to actually live peaceably with all of our neighbors because capacity to destroy things has become, it's just getting larger and larger and larger every day. And so what was a beautiful proposition 2000 years ago, is now simply what has to happen. This is just very practical. so vivid, the image that came to my mind clash at two one was I'm going back to the your image of the hand opening and closing. Right? So one of the problems with identity is when it does that, again, it's an obligate, and and then forgotten. So I am not Roman. But there's something about Roman this that is helpful in me being able to have a way of being in relationship with the people around me. If I, if I, somehow what's the term, not differ, but almost like the fundamental sovereignty of the singularity of my soul is connected to the divine. If I give that into something, which is in fact less than that, that I'm actually engaging in a profane acts so that I can't do that. That's is in terms of the constant change of identity. It's doing this And then forgetting that you could ever close your hand. So to become the identity become a revolutionary French member to become an Irish Republican or to become a lawyer from Texas to become a Texan. As opposed to being what in fact, what you really are, which is vastly greater than any of the things could ever be, and yet also being able to use those as we've been in relationship. So that's one side. And then the other side is okay, what would it mean? What does it mean to actually be able to identify this is almost for me, I'm saying, Let's design it. Let's think what are the design characteristics of the thing that you're talking about?

Jonathan 54:32  
Well, the thing that I'm talking about, it does look like a medieval village is what it looks like that that the structure of it that's what it looks like, to me is that there's something there's a transcendent center, there's a center which is actually not of this world. It's not Yep, it's beyond everything and, and that that's where we actually meet it's not there. You know, it's there's signs around it, there's a church and there's a holy there's an altar and there's a cup and in the cup, there's There's there's wine and there's bread, but it's not there. It's all it's the it's the seed and the seed and the seed and seed. It's like, it's hidden. It's a hidden reality. It's the, you know, it's Yeah, it's the pattern hidden in the in the world. So that's what is transcendent. And like you said, that reaches from there, all the way down to me, in being created in the image of God. And so it's like, that's the line. And then along that line, then we have communion, communions of love that will manifest themselves and so you'll have, and those will be hierarchical and a proper sense in the sense that they are those that are above us, and they're there. Their responsibility is to care for those that are below and those that are below are there to provide, you know, that which comes from below, provide food, provide whatever is needed for the thing that's above to be able to care for you. 

Jordan 56:00  
Can I say support because it create nice symmetry.

Jonathan 56:05
There you go support, support. That's a better word. Yeah, it's a good word. And so to me, that's what it looks like. Yo me that seems to be the only possible structure for that to happen. Like you need something, you need a trend, the invisible transcendent in the center. Or else it doesn't, it doesn't or else it stops. And it also becomes nationalism becomes this. And that becomes, you know, even in terms of religion, like if we don't understand that it's a mystery. You don't understand that. Let's say that God transcends all all, transcends everything transcends even our religious, you know, even the religious frame that we have, then that's also a danger because then we have then we have, you know, the crusades, we have religious wars or whatever. But if we but if we can fully see that beyond, even even though let's say the revelation that we have, or the church building, the tradition we have is true. That beyond that God is always beyond God is always beyond beyond beyond is not cannot be contained cannot be cannot be framed. He's yard. So to me that's the only way for it to to actually work I don't see another way. But maybe maybe it's just because I mean maybe that that you can understand by my whole story by why I am Why am I doing what I'm doing? It's like obviously I've taken that I drink that Kool Aid and so now I my life lays itself out that way.

Jonathan 57:26  
Well fortunately for this conversation, I didn't drink that Kool Aid. And yeah, I agree. So it's nice. I came through this to this place through a very different road and it's a road that looked a lot more like Sam Harris to be perfectly right. So I can have a first person experience of what it is to have it all get third person mind and one where my my metaphysics, right and I'm actually going to use that to be more foundational than ontology didn't include the transcendent in any meaningful way. Meaning there was not a way of actually grasping the meaning of transcendence as an aspect of the whole thing. We can't can't actually say reality or world. It's actually bigger than that. And that's the whole point. And so, in this conversation, we've actually noticed now three things. So if I think about and I think this is, I think, I think there's a very precise piece here. It's not quite right, but a little bit. So we have our sandbox, Sam, over here, who is kind of representing the aspect of the whole thing that we might call science. I got actually I wrote it I wrote an article that actually had this in it. I'm not say a minute but the these distinctions, so we might call science, knowing semantics, propositional knowledge, models of reality, those kinds of things, which are apart but they're definitely apart. And these are those are the frames like you're talking about frames, creating frames, putting things in frames is very useful and as a part of the thing. Then we have here I'm kind of just forcing the face But it's not terrible, is we now have McCain to sandbox Jordan, we can do jumping Jordan. 
No, it's just too hilarious, right? sandbox Jordan, who's kind of representing living living this like the actual, like you said like take responsibility for yourself take responsibility for your family. Living in life it does it does actually allow and support you and thriving, then it's a good choice, probably that whole story. And those are not the same. There's a distinct and I'm actually By the way, this is going to be a little bit challenging, but I map in my own language. So this is just semantics. At this point. I actually met with the thing that Jordan Peterson is doing as religion as as distinct from science. And then the third that you're calling out, which I do imagine does seem to be right as it missing, at least explicitly. And if the previous two sandbox people is the transcendent, which then I'll just tag as mystery and one can. One can include mystery religion, but I maintain it's important to hold them Separately, because they are in fact different. These that category, the notion of the living this and the rituals and the use of the processions and all the things that we do that enable us to be bound in real bodies living with each other. And then that feeling in the sense of connectedness to the transcendent, all the way up and down in these different levels is a different quality. And you have, so those are three different things. And one of the things that I've noticed in most conversations is that most conversations, either don't have all three of those things quite often they lack one or two of them. Or the phrase that I used in my article as they cross the streams invoking. Remember our last vestige of culture pop culture, Ghostbusters. So science doing religion or religion doing science or mystery doing science or mystery doing religion? Yeah. And if you just can hold him and say, okay, the, the transcendent is is, you know, it's part of the part of the thing You have to have the transcendent if you want to do what we're trying to do.

Jonathan 1:01:04  
So I'm curious about when you say that, you said the transcendent isn't part of your metaphysics, and so then maybe it's also a good thing. 

Jordan 1:01:15
The transcendent is part of my metaphor. I noticed is that it's often absent from the conversation. Alternatively, too present and other things are absent, which is equally problematic.

Jonathan 1:01:27  
Yeah. But also because people often they don't they, I feel like a lot of people, especially the modern Christians, they have this weird to world view of reality. You know, it's like there's God in heaven. And there's, there's things here and somehow separate, like, I don't, I'm way more of a platanus like, I'm platanus in the sense that, you know, the transcendent happens at all levels and things transcended all levels. There in the if you're holding a cup, the identity of the cup is not in the cup. You can't find it. It's If you try it, if you accumulate the parts of the cup, you'll never get to the identity of the cup, the identity cup necessarily transcends the cup. And that's true of a family history of a country. It's true of everything. And so it's like, if you just keep, if you keep doing that some point, it's like, you just keep having things which transcend the accumulation of particulars. It seems like transcendence is just a part of, of reality, people call it emergence because they don't like the word transcendence. But like I said, you can see it bottom up if you want, but you can also see a top down to me, those two are the same. It's just a different just you just stand in different ways and just stand in different places to look at it.

Jordan 1:02:42  
I believe at the middle as well. Bottom up, top down and right in the middle.

Jonathan 1:02:48  
Well, there's a great quote by St. Maximus the Confessor, who's a mystic. He talks about how he talks about the mystic who perceives the identities of things and their particular Separate, so he can see the spiritual essences. And you can see the the particulars of something, you know, you can see them both. And then he realizes that they actually don't contradict each other at all, that they actually are there together that they, they represent the same reality, that it's not that's the that is really the incarnational way of thinking. That's to me that the highest Christian understanding of the world it's platonic, in the sense that he believes in the reality of essences, but it's not platonic, in the sense that it also believes that those essences out to be incarnated they have to have body and so it's like the it's the meeting of the to that middle that you talked about, that's where reality happens. It's where the where the essences and the particulars meet, that's where the one in the many where it meets. That's it. That's the world, that's life.

Jordan 1:03:50  
That's life. Yeah. Yeah. When I was earlier struggling with trying to not use the word real, I would say where they meet is what is real.

Jonathan 1:03:58  
Yeah, yeah. I agree. Totally.

Int 1:04:01  
Yeah, I was just going to interject. I mean, we're getting towards probably about an hour or so now. Yep. Like, but I just wanted to ask one question if you've got, like, a couple of minutes more? What I was hearing you say, Jonathan about, we need to rescue a sense of the transcendent. We I know we've talked before about the need for either in a place where religion we need something in the place where religion used to be, or I guess you would probably say that we've got one that we need to renew. 
And also, I heard you say, Jordan, that you didn't, what I heard you say was you didn't grow up with a place for the transcendent or that wasn't part of your metaphysics, but you've learned that that needs to be there needs to be a place for the transcendent. I'd love to hear where you might come together, what needs to be in that space where religion used to be or how do we renew that sense of the transcend?

Jordan 1:05:00  
Well, there's a bunch of things that come up for me. So the first thing that I noticed is like care, or carefulness or the fact it's funny, so even as a word, the word sacred about to leave my mouth, I immediately want to warn, be careful, because the world that we live in doesn't have a clue what that means, more or less. A lot of this has to do with this obligate third person that we've been talking about so, or a lack of carefulness that the recognition that the very notion of the transcendent can't be held in the words you're using to describe it. Doesn't matter what frame you're using it was whether you're drawing it or speaking it or dancing, it doesn't matter. Whatever it is, is that bestest symbol pointing towards that which it is certainly not right. And so to be able to recover, or to perhaps remember, a capacity and a facility, the capacity and the facility for actually being in relationship with the transcendent is a real thing. Alright, so this is a key, you can't try to force March toolkits that were used for creating models of reality into doing the work of the transcendent, they're gonna, it's not going to work, they're going to be like, What the hell's going on here doesn't make any sense, because it doesn't make sense in the context of toolkits for using making models of reality and semantic structures, right? It's just That's not the thing. 
But it isn't to say there is a thing, we just have to actually really learn or remember how to do it. And some of the places we were talking about, like this difference between pretending and attending and relationship with your child is a really good place to learn that thing. And to make it very grounded, right, because we are there The thing is, we have we have this, again, because of the mistake of the way that we've embodied the transcendent we try to point ourselves at it is we have a sense of the transcendent as being somehow too big. It's, it can't possibly be present to the moment of my relationship with my child because it's actually this vastness that is you know, bigger than mountains, when in fact the reality is is that it has to be present in every moment in every action. periods and every relationship. And so learning and reading relationship with it, that level is a great way of grounding it like Oh, okay. It's actually not crazy talk. It's not fantasy. It's actually as real as the particulars, right. It's the particulars and the trends that come together into what is real. And so rebuilding a facility and a capacity to speak about it, or at least to point and orient our actions and choices in relationship with it is a tricky business. It has to be done with a lot of care.

Jonathan 1:07:33  
Yeah, no, I agree with everything you said. But of course, then I'll add my little thing, which is I talked a little bit before about the problem the modern world has in terms of oppositional thinking. That means that we've set our reality in terms of opposition. And I think that once I realized that or once I realized that one of the problems is this oppositional attitude. And I kind of got that, okay, so I don't, I don't need to see my place in history as oppositional. I don't need to see myself as having to get rid of that which is before rather, I need to shine as much light as I can on that which was before, make it bright, make it and make it alive. And so to me the solution because we are all from, we all share a similar history, all the people here that are talking, we're all of European descent, at least our ancestors, we're all Christians, probably not that far behind. 
And so, you know, maybe one generation maybe maximum two generations behind. And so to me that the, the solution is is to reconnect or to recall here to remember all of these things is what I want, and I don't want and I want to do, like I said, Make that which we had as bright as possible. So that it so that it's alive today so that it can carry us so that it can, it can give us a sense of place a sense of place and to continue to have time and place in space and a place in terms of our communities. And I know it's not easy because the fragmentation is so strong in our community, but I don't in terms of the scaling up that I talked about before. That's the only thing I see all the other types of movements and kind of religious movements and these kind of pseudo religious or kind of quasi religious movements, I see them as participating in the in the breakdown in terms of the higher maybe they can afford something in terms of individuals own realization, but they they're participating in the the general breakdown so that's my you know, I know it's maybe idealistic, but that is that is at least the road that I've kind of got got myself on.

Jordan 1:10:00  
Well, the last thing that came up for me, right there, it is very much a double edged sword. And I think is the way to actually convert it from a sword into a plowshare. So if you were coming from the late 20th century, what's it called secular humanist, scientific materialist lineage. And you would like the world to hang together, you have a very practical problem, which is that there's about 100 million of you. And there's about 7 billion people who are deeply committed to some lineage or tradition that gave rise to where they are today. And the likelihood that you're going to convert them on mass to your particular momentary piece of history is not going to have zero is in fact zero. So something has to happen that actually is able to do what you're talking about, to to actually go the opposite direction instead of trying to to browbeat the people who are holding these lineages into submission. actually cast more light and shine more light, but then that's one that's one edge because the other edges, we have to figure out how these guys are actually able to enter into a truly non oppositional mindset. And we need to get our Protestants in our Catholics to, for forever, like really forever stop hacking at each other because of disagreements about things that I don't even understand. And and, and then expand that out, right? Because the big embrace here is going to have to include this is a billion Muslims, right? And they come with their own internal conflicts with each other. That's right, I'm in a permanent, and then I've got a whole lot of other folks with lots of different lineages of greater size and scope, and antiquity. And all of us are going to have to be able to live together really, really well. Like at a level of living together. Well, that has rarely been seen in a single household, much less than the entire human family.

Jonathan 1:11:53  
Yeah, that's it. You just made my hill a lot steeper there.

Jordan 1:12:03  
But now you're on the right Hill.

Int 1:12:06  
Yeah, is that the hill to die on though? A beautiful image of a double edged sword being turned into a plow show like that.

Jordan 1:12:14  
Somebody somewhere probably thought of that first.