Jubilee 0:00  
Yet the infrastructure exists, we don't have to recreate a railroad, we don't have to recreate a lot, we can work backwards from there. It gives us the power and the tools to do what we need to do without the downside of it being owned by Google and Facebook, and which is that we don't trust it. And we're not doing it together. And we don't own it together. And so there's a lot of what we can do together that they will never be able to do. That we cannot compete them with, like they can't be transparent in the fact that they collect our data they kind of are but like, we get that it's only used to sell us more stuff that is also destroying our planet. Whereas when we collect our data in a way that is empowering to the like, where you get to hold it and you get to decide whether you use it for the collective good and you're good. You're only going to give up your data if you get a direct benefit. And you can see the group benefit. So if we give up our data in a way that safe so you can't necessarily attributed back to me, right? You can't look up like my medical information. But if my medical information is Washington and available to the whole those are that's the way we can like cure cancer. That's the way when if what I spend my financial money on is is Washington made safe, and then we're able to use that data, we can recreate the entire means of production when it makes sense to do so right to be like, Hey, your whole neighborhood is buying this thing. What if you work together to create it? 
What if you you know, and designing the tools to be able to implement those solutions when anyone comes up with a new idea, instead of them needing to go through the arduous process of creating a business and seeing if it's viable in the market, in the competition game a landscape? They can bring it to the collective and say, hey, how do we this is the spark of an idea. How do we make it better? How do we make it so that everybody wins? because the idea is and the cooperative any new person who joins is bringing with them, their data, their ideas, their experience in a way that you never want. The only way we are limiting who's coming on board is if you can't yet accept more people, right? If you have a limited server space to 10,000 people, you can't necessarily jump to 10 million. But we want to jump to 10 million. So we're going to be incentivized to like, Okay, how do we double and then double and then double, in a way that is sustainable?

Jordan 2:30  
Yep. So I get it. And even your example about the credit unions, I barked up that tree myself. And it sounds like maybe you're in Canada. So in the States, I ended up having a conversation with somebody who was part of the federal agency that manages governance credit unions. Precisely as trying to How do you hack that system to get something that can scale? And she was great because she said, Look, here's the deal, it ain't gonna happen. Like, this is the rules and this was really gonna happen and what what you're doing is definite within the rules. I guarantee you, they're not gonna let this happen, which is a good like a good learning experience about kind of the nature of what's happening. But yes, and then the next thing that I'm nodding yes, that is sorry, the way that I think it's very difficult for me to express in I get that easy term. And I appreciate you trying to do it easy. Did you happen to listen to the podcast that I did recently with that guy called Venture stories?

Jubilee 3:47  
I was just listening to it before talking to you. And there was a lot of language I did not understand but part of it is that my background, I got a bit for sure, chunks of what you were you were trying to say.

Jordan 3:59  
So I've only listened to about half of it the second half, really. But I dropped the ball in the last 10 minutes because he asked a question where he invoked and I didn't read The Economist. It was basically saying, sort of Margaret Thatcher's thing of like, yeah, it's unsustainable, but it's 1000 years before collapses and what else is there? The answer is that there is something else. In fact, not only is there something else, but that's something else is if you just kind of look clearly at what has been emerging in the context of what we've just been doing. You see it happening, the story that the the ultimate I wanted to share here because I you probably already got us we'll just excuse me nodding heads at each other for a little while, is if you take a look at industrial capitalism, and go that go all the way back, let's start with like trains. So you've got iron and steel and machinery, and you kind of do a snapshot, every phase change every major upgrade so you kind of go Carnegie Steel, and you do for motors and then you do General Electric, and then you jump into IBM. And then you jump into hp. And then you jump into apple. 
And then you jump into Google, which you see is there's a, there's a line, there's a movement that happens where the humans, the individual humans become more and more important. And the context becomes more and more humane. Because it is in the collaborative capacity creative collaboration is, is increasingly becoming the obvious center of what's being done. And so if you do sort of extend that a little bit like draw, look just okay, what's next, like, what's just that arrow got an arrow, it's got this really great vector that you could just sort of draw. Now just imagine you could project that vector one step further. That's what you're talking about saying, hey, let's just fully realize a thing that's been unconsciously happening industrial capitalism, Mickey conscious, funny, actually not intending to phrase conscious capitalism. I think is an effort to not do this. But let's make that thing self aware. Which is if we focus the energy on enabling human beings to be fully realized human beings expressing their creative collaboration with each other, which is non trivial, it's not an easy thing. But if we pull that off, then you get all the rest for free. Like all everything else starts to flow.

Jubilee 6:26  
Yes, yeah, we all we all get the genius that is unlocked by humanity getting to live their genius.

Jordan 6:32  
Yep, and again for me, it's concretely saying and Look, guys, that thing where you move from people living like in cubicles and suits to sitting in beanbag chairs to, you know, having a whole mix, like the whole plethora of all the different type ologies of humans and where they come from, like just recognizing that. It's just a matter of just knowing that and then just creating context that enables it. Kind of non trivial, and you're also swimming upstream every time you try to do this thinking that the rules allow it. You keep getting that answer the rules a lot, but it's really not going to happen. And so you have to be thoughtful.

Jubilee 7:13  
There's ideas I have around that, like there's a certain security that comes in the fact that what I've envisioned is something we will do transparently. There is a point where that can absolutely be stopped, ie someone could kill me right now. Or somebody could you know what I mean? Like, if there's 12 of us, you can just silence or buy those people out, right? When there's 10,000 people, when there's a million people, when there's 10 million people and our foundation is we have to be transparent. We're running a tech company, where everybody has access to all the information as defaults. That doesn't mean there aren't some areas maybe, where that's not happening. Yeah, if somebody comes in and needs, like, if we were doing the credit union thing. Together, we could find ways around that much more easily than it dozen people or 100 people, because part of it is the people with power and money have decided that they're not going to allow that to happen. And the people who empower the people with power and money are us the 99% We're the ones that give them our money. We're the ones who allow them to have that power. So that like if we, if there's enough of us, there's basically nothing we can't do. But we hit there has to be enough of us, right? We can break the patent system for things especially like pharmaceutical drugs that are like, are you What's your Yeah, people are dying because of insulin. Fuck you. We're not gonna stand for that. A lot of these things happen because the informations in a vacuum. It's like, you know, you're fighting the credit union system, but the world doesn't know you're fighting the credit union system.

Jordan 8:47  
Well, ultimately, my intent is essentially just to empower you. So and the I'm seeing kind of two or three ways there. One is to say okay, the the work that we did in OG Game B is there was work that was done between 2010 and 2013-14 by a pretty good group of people is helpful but there's some good ideas there that can maybe just you don't have to reinvent the wheel if you just give them to you. Second is then getting a deeper sense of where you are and how we can find ways to bring collaborators into your context, can hold more and carry the things so the thing has more embodiment. And then the third is that mysterious listening to see what can't really be thought through but nonetheless is actually knocking at the door trying to emerge being opening up the space and being open and available to listen.

Jubilee 9:56  
Space I've had to be in by myself is that constant knocking at the door, which doesn't necessarily work by yourself but is also a lot easier by yourself. Like, what is the next piece that I'm not getting and then my brain creates it. But if we're not creating it, I have to sell it to people, as I get to emerge through the group.

Jordan 10:21  
Yep, boy, you got it. That's exactly right. Alright, so what I want to start at is with it feels like you're pretty feisty, so we can do the feisty stuff. put this in context that there is the feisty stuff sits in a container or in a context of nurturing right so there's, if you things are in the in the right relationship, so that may sound even possibly scary, is it is scary, but it only is you only do it in the context where there's actually a really solid I think of it as a womb like a really solid nurturing context, and it has your name. It's the Jubilee. So this is a technology that we worked on to figure out how to deal with asymmetry of power. So when game a degree, which game he decides that it wants to actually say be nasty. The Jubilee is a, as far as I can tell, and there's been a lot of thinking about this way of instantiating, what you were just talking about, Behold the power that cuts through the various Well, there's an up with the language in game theory called the Nash equilibrium.

Jubilee 11:35  
I know a bit about game theory, but I don't know exactly what the Nash equilibrium is.

Jordan 11:39  
So the Nash equilibrium is where everybody has made a choice between what they see as being the possible choices. And nobody will change their choice now that the choices have been made. So what happens is like we've all kind of like we've got ourselves into into a bit of a bind, where we may actually be able to notice that there's a better better thing over there. But none of us will go because it doesn't make sense for even for one, two or three of us to go, we kind of all have to go. But if anybody didn't even one person defects, the whole thing doesn't work. So it's a, you're stuck in its in its stable, it actually is quite stable. So from one point of view, it's a good thing. It's a stable state, from their point of view, it's a bad thing, cuz you're stuck, you can't change. So one of the reasons why we haven't been able to execute the sovereignty that is inherent in us as as being is these is a Nash equilibrium. And one of the characteristics of this is, for example, as a collective action problem, you know, how do you get a bunch of people to do something where if if not enough, do it, it doesn't work. So here's the construct, ready? So there's four components to it. The first component Is the commitment. The second component is the, the oath. The third component is the trigger. And the fourth component is the payload. So they're all there. 
They're tied and they connect. So the the commitment is, you know, I Jubilee brisco somewhat ironically, agree, I sign up that when these things happen, I will do these things. And you should imagine like, technically should is a video and you upload it to a blockchain or something like that. But it's anonymous, right? It's sealed, it's encrypted. And so I will do these things when a million other people have signed up, you know, so it's a kick to sort of like collective action problem solution. Once a critical mass of people who have made the commitment alongside me, it's activated, all the commitments become unsealed, removed from anonymous to transparent, and I do the I do the thing that I'm committing to and the thing that I'll be committing to you is a Jubilee, which is to say that I will, at the moment of the triggering, I will no longer pay any debts that I owe. 
I will no longer enforce any debts that are owed to me. And I will support in every possible circumstance, every jurisdiction where I have the right to vote, formal policies that that jurisdiction, enact the same policy into the city of where do you live. Thank you, City of Vancouver, a good target city of Vancouver will formally issue a Jubilee and the province of British Columbia were formerly issue of Jubilee in the nation of Canada. You don't have sovereignty above that, as far as I know. But like that's the best that commitment. I'm signing up for that that's what I will do. And then you've got the notion of the trigger, and we can identify the trigger, right, and there's many, many different constructs. There's different versions of what this game looks like the people have been experimenting with, what's the one that has the most potency to it. Just say a simple trigger is that we say when you know a million people have signed up will do it or 38 million. Then you have the payload, the payload, it gets very interesting. The payload you can actually drop, this is what the nurturing piece gets lit up. You could drop a lot of other stuff. So the basic payload is the Jubilee, specific Jubilee commitment. That's like that's the point of the spear. That's the thing that activates it. But I could put other stuff in. For example, I could put a universal basic income. So one of the things that will happen when you activate the Jubilee is that all fiat currency will evaporate in a matter of days.
For the same reason that what you just talked about banking, like something like 98%, we modeled about 90% of fiat currency now includes by the way China didn't at the time, it didn't include time but now includes everybody in Switzerland will it will evaporate within a week. Well, okay, that's problem, but what we do is, everybody gets 15 thousand dollars in their account in new money immediately. So, Jubilee, we all sign up for the Jubilee. Immediately we issue a new people's currency that is no longer associated with with the banking system. And it's $50,000 in the account of everybody who signs up everybody who's everybody who has an account and if you create the kind of get into it, and 1500 dollars a month and universal basic income, which will increase by some rate every month up until it's the number, looked like we could get it up to was 8000 a month in about 15 years.
And by the way, like stable. It's the opposite of unstable it actually makes the system more stable to do it that way. The there other other payloads the one that was the most interesting had to do with healthcare, like how do you actually put healthcare into a community context? But you get the idea, why does a if you want to explore this machinery, the machinery has a certain Sort of characteristics. And the key is that what it does is it actually it disrupts the Nash equilibrium. Because it creates it creates a game theory theoretic defection strategy that everybody who is a maximally sociopathic financier must follow, please just to say, past at some epsilon past some minimum number of people who are signing up for this Jubilee, there's some probability that it will actually come to pass in different jurisdictions, so maybe it's more likely in Argentina in Greece than it is in, in Canada. 
But okay, that's what it is. And what happens is, is that as you begin to have to calculate that probability of a Jubilee into the financial calculus, this has the characteristic of destabilizing the currency and increasing interest rates for those places where the sensitivity is the highest, which causes actually, series of cascade effect which we actually saw in the European Consequences of women, the 2008 American financial crisis had a cascade effect that finally showed up in actually showed up everywhere. But we saw really nearly break things in Europe. That's what we were used. We were as we were building this model, we were actually in real time being able to watch that and reverse model it so you can design it so that there's this like a diamond clear, very small impact cascades through the system. And it creates a what's called a race effect. I think very similar to you have in mind your own patents, by the way, you can build a similar system for patents where two things happen simultaneously, the average person so the person who's isn't an early adopter, who isn't coming in with a lot of consciousness about here's what I want to do, begins to realize that it's just a better choice to join this activity. 
And so that began to get an acceleration of more and more people joining and then here's the thing is the most powerful is this quote unquote smart money, your maximum extracted financier begins to race for the exits, they begin to see that this the Gaming is actually coming to an end and so their race for the exit moves you into a such a hyperbolic growth rate so what ends up happening is you'll see the the ticker like imagine just have a ticker that says number of people signing up for Jubilee today. It's like 1000, 50,000, 200,000 the ticker is going up and the consequences like the material consequences in the financial environment is pretty flat, pretty flat, pretty flat. little curve, done, like it maybe weeks possibly. So this is one of the things that we actually were developing the game be are, how does game be use its capacities to generate asymmetric competition, without competing asymmetric competition to game B. The very first one and the one that we really spent time dialing in watching because it's obviously financial capitalism is the center of financial is the center of financial capitalism. And it's hyper hyper fragile. We trace the threads of all the different causal structures, like politics in politics is deeply deeply subordinated to money right now. In some sense, always has been but particularly now And so trying to do work at the political level doesn't really have a lot of traction because you're you're you're ultimately playing the wrong game. You think you're playing the political game? It's actually a money game and you're not playing the money Game and Money is playing the money game. So switch it. Let's do something which is a hyper politics, that money doesn't understand that disrupts money, which then reopens the possibility of doing regular politics in a different modality.
That would be a Game A reset. Exactly. But you because the code, the payload can be whatever you want the payload to be. You can you can do this, in fact, exactly at this pivot point is where the original thing we were doing became game B, which was I had been assigned a particular task called Deep code of doing asking the deep questions and do a lot of the analysis. And what I came out came out with was exactly you said, which was okay, this, this would definitely work in the sense that would definitely break the system. In fact, it's kind of easy like there's the game theory is there like we could probably pull this off ourselves and in 12 months, this is before By the way, like blockchain existed all really like the consciousness that money was something that the people could just decide to build. But if you but we don't have a context, we don't have actually a thing that can hold that energy. And so it will Rico here around a kind of a next stage of gay and It'll be a better one in just the same way that, you know, the world we live in right now is a better world than the world of the 13th century. But it has two really bad negative characteristics. One is as a very short half life, it will it will accelerate to collapse in probably 15 years, just very long. And to In the meantime, it will continue to consume complexity at a hyper accelerated rate. So that will work but there's that that's actually not a stable solution. 
It's a bit kind of fun, because you get to blow things up. And that there's, there's, you know, Fight Club was a nice fun movie. But it's not a stable solution. So we have to actually get into thinking about game B. And so that was that. So then we started looking at the the directionality of, what's the other side like what's what's on the other side of looking glass, which for me, was a pretty massive undertaking. Meaning I had to actually become a different person to actually be able to add to completely become a different kind of kind of person and a different person. In this in this conversation is where the rival risk nonrival was and to robbers distinction started to really become important. Because the, the essence of why it is that what you're talking about is true has to do with the leverage and power of the antivirus both at the subjective level and anti rivalries, disposition, cooperation and medical operation. And at the object of level, the kinds of things tak that have the most generative capacity and the sync between them that well, many hands make light work is true. So we're trying to plant the fields and grow corn, more people, it's helpful. The leverage off of that level of cooperation is just a lot lot less than that inventing zero point energy, like it's just not the same category. And the realization that almost everyone is working at roughly less than 15% of what would be possible as individuals, and that that reduces collaborative capacity to around 1% of what will be possible, which is massive, right? If you begin to realize that if we just shifted a few things, you to unlock something like five to 100,000 X, generative capacity in the anti rivalrous domain, which has exponential feedback. Then, obviously, this is where we're nodding. I'm almost done with my diatribe. 

Jubilee 24:50
Very interesting. I'm loving this.

Jordan 24:56  
Two things that came out of that work that were very important one was Transparency is not a motto, is not a monoculture of virtue. Transparency has to be symmetric with wisdom. Because otherwise, you get asymmetric capacity without asymmetric competence. This is the ability to give a child of God. For example, the one that I'm most familiar with actually is when I was young, to be a hacker, you actually didn't know your shit like you, you yourself knew how to do it. And what you might do is you might write software that made it easier for you to do the thing that you knew how to do. Once you wrote the software, somebody who didn't know how to do it could use the software to do this. Do you think is it we call them script kiddies? And in this is not to say By the way, that somebody who was a hacker had the moral wisdom to actually be symmetric to the power but at least they have the competence to be symmetric to the power When you started getting into the script kiddies, you started getting, you know, teenagers who had the ability to do sip distributed denial of service attacks on button. So they didn't build that was the equivalent of state intelligence agencies. CRISPР, you're familiar with crispr cas nine?

Jubilee 26:21  
No, because I keep trying to look it up. And it doesn't make sense. All right, keep it doesn't generate on Google.

Jordan 26:27  
It's science, real good, very powerful. And it has the ability to actually change the genome type in cells quickly, reliably. And predictably, when you can actually deliver on desired results. So it's like genetic engineering, the way they described genetic engineering back in the 80s. It's the actual thing, and I believe they're actually yeah, it's been it's been out now for more than In a decade, it's being used, they have been able to do it in vitro, so they can do it in living cells, they have not been able to yet get it to do it in somatic non stem cells. That's why I couldn't give it to you just now. But they're working on it. And there's a good reason to believe that it's totally doable. And in fact, there's good reason to move the Chinese and back actually have done it, but they haven't told me about it. But even if you're not doing it in humans, a human adults, you could say, for example, do it in viruses and bacteria easily enough. And so that's a big deal, right? The way of thinking about is that the kinds of germ warfare that only the United States and the Soviet Union could deliver on in the 20th century will will be available to a person with a PhD. Biology and about five years. But a PhD in biology just not deliver the moral wisdom to not kill everybody delivers the asymmetric capacity to do so. Because unfortunately, we don't get how to deal with it. So what happens is, is that when you, when you activate this capacity of career collaboration, is going to have to be very careful of taking into account the negatives that will come with the positives, we will get for sure, massive increases in capacity. But it has to actually we have to actually be thoughtful about building symmetry in competence or symmetry and wisdom with power. Otherwise, we will in fact, for short, kill ourselves because it just takes a few bad actors or if you just make mistakes.

Jubilee 28:42  
Yeah, that's scary.

Jordan 28:44  
Yeah, so this is a big thing. Like we spent, as somebody with a background was technology entrepreneur, had a built in bias towards fucking just do it. Try it, it's probably fail anyway, if it works. You know, awesome, it'll be fun, like sit down and really look through the math and look through the logic and realize that the proofs that were being put up with certain like it wasn't, there's no ambiguity it is for sure the case that it is existential, it kills everybody. And not that wall, like less than a decade, if you get these triggers, right. So it's one of those things like, shoot, we can't actually trigger game be at real scale, until we've actually figured out how to do it so that people get it's like a guild, an old fashioned medieval guild system. 
You get access to certain levels of what we know, as you have embodied wisdom, the ability to make good choices with the things you've been given. It's not that mysterious. Actually it's a thing we know we've seen people who are wise, we know that they're wise people who don't make foolish, reckless, thoughtless choices, and they're necessary. good choices. But they're careful not to make choices at all. If they're concerned about whether or not it's gonna be a good choice, they'll ask for help or counsel. And we'll go slowly enough to make those choices. Characteristics wisdom. Just one side, that's one piece. And so to reduce, you're moving forward with what you're doing, be thoughtful about that. be thoughtful about how you can actually say, as we move into transparency, how do we build things, so at the center really is maturity at the center is development, humans and wholeness of human you don't want a symmetry and Human Development. You don't want people who are really high IQ and low EQ, for example. You want to be able to make sure that, as people are moving into this, the whole person is received in the place and all the aspects of themselves are receiving the paid place. 
And you can imagine there's lots of reasons for that because one of the reasons why people think do bad things, it becomes some part of them is rebelling at some interior aspect that is not heard themselves to the whole of the person and person themselves has to actually come in relationship with the whole themselves. And then as they do that, this by the way is is it turns out this is the other side the second piece of it. So, the first one, the second piece that was going to say they link it's actually the secret sauce of how you unlock creative collaboration anyway, it's what prevents me from being able to truly truly creatively collaborate with you is like a lot of noise in my interior parts of me that don't want to hear you because they project on you, or wants to control what's happening in the relationship. Or parts of me that just want to You're just an amateur and want to engage will engage in immature activities, or parts of me to get hurt and then have amateur defense responses. That's a really true that gets in the way at the inner like small group level. Obviously, there's systemic stuff that happens outside of that, but you can just a group of seven flies apart because the people who are showing up the amount of say was like, okay, inverse square law, sorry, the repulsive force, the centripetal force of the, the noise that happens when individuals are not deeply in integrity and healed. 
And mature means that as the energy and the grouping increases up almost going to square law, and which causes the repulsive force to fly apart. This is why things breakdown is why collaboration with other people ends up being really, really challenging beyond any small number or small, like dyads. You can get examples of dyad, part dyadic partnerships that just fit very, very well creatively and they can do amazing things and and can find ways to work through the tension. triads are really hard quads nearly impossible over a long period of time. It's just the complexity of the relationship. So as it turns out, these two pieces fit nicely that the answer to the problem of how do we actually enable this sea change and creative collaboration involves an exterior context shift. So all the various parameters and constraints on choice that shape why we make the choices from the outside, like rules of ownership and equity and things like that. And then interior shifts that enabled the what I've been calling sovereignty, like that's what the word sovereignty came from. Naming that naming what it means for individuals to step into a wholeness of self and increasing capacity to be in like, open vulnerable, responsive relationship with other people. As somebody is supported in their becoming whole, they also are increasingly capable venturing into creative collaboration. But they're also increasingly mature. And therefore can can actually be entrusted with more power, because they'll actually be more capable of making better choices. By the way, this as far as I can tell, really interesting step functions. Like it's not it's not a linear thing. There's certain things where the amount of power, the asymmetry of power means that your choice making capacity has to be quite high, before you cross into that threshold. Like, I can't I wouldn't be di shoe I would not trust myself with the keys to CRISPRCas 10 for example. But it wouldn't trust anybody who I knew except for like six people who were quite remarkable By the way, it's quite palpable when you encounter somebody who has that level of embodied wisdom. 

Jubilee 35:07  
Those are all very important factors. The issue is Game A is run by sociopaths. And they have the power and they have the keys and science done behind locked doors does not in any way guarantee that these things are in place in any way, shape, or form. So collectively having transparency when I'm talking about transparency, I don't mean true, crisper transparency. I mean, transparency in the board of directors of the tech company. I mean, where money comes from and where it goes, what decisions we're making, is beholden to our members towards complete transparency.

Jordan 35:44  
Yeah, choice making and sense making needs to be fully transparent.

Unknown Speaker  35:49  
A simple version of what you're talking about that is available right now, is this debate on gun laws. And we need to have stricter gun laws because of what's happening in the United States. And although intellectually I support that, we're also at a point in technology where you can 3d print a gun. And so what is evolution in consciousness so people don't want to kill each other? Yeah, we have no solution for that. Yeah, yelling at people and putting laws in place and not dealing with you know, mental health and, and just the like, our personal autonomy being hurt to them and being are a group of human beings and we feel bad is where our power lies. That's what we need to be dealing with. And we're not able to deal with that in our current system at all. And so I'd rather have a system of transparency of you know, if we're doing something like voting whether to fund a project like CRISPR part of it is inherent in the system is looking at what could go wrong. What Why would this be positive? And why would this be negative? And we're not just throwing out? I mean, my background is actually in genetics. It's what I have my bachelor's in, it's not a PhD. But I don't have to worry about it just yet.
No, no, GMOs don't. When they first I was like, Yeah, they sound great, awesome. Like we're solving all these problems. And then looking into the science of it, I was like, but we don't understand it. We're, you know, breaking things into their components, putting them out into the world in a way that they can just reproduce, this is not. And it's done for profit, right. And they're two are deciding whether it's ethical. And that's a no way a solution. And so at least with transparent science, collectively, we understand that we don't want GMOs necessarily, or at least not GMOs on a massive scale without them also being tested first, right, like the positive and the negative while we need to feed the masses. Can we feed the masses without GMOs? Yes. Can we you know, can we create GMOs that don't require heavy amounts of pesticides or don't kill our guts or don't. But that involves testing that involves not, you know, creating massive fields of it because I have a patent on this, this genetic material, right? 
So I don't know if what I'm talking about solves in any way the CRISPR problem or the AI problem, because there's always going to be the possibility of somebody creating something in their garage, and not not asking for permission from the group. But part of it is in the transparency, having conversations about I am all for not having as a punishment in any way, shape or form that we have now, but certain things that are life ending, like creating a nuclear bomb here in you know, creating a human being from scratch, like certain things that are like these cannot be done by individuals feel that need except the old fashioned. Allowed to create a human being so that way, need to have some kind of repercussion that we've laid out. That's like, right, is it worth the Eureka moment? As a scientist to come to AI to come to crisper, if it also means you're living your life in prison for the end zone like you live in that space. 

Jordan 39:10
Here's the gift that projects like yours can give. And it's the inverse of that. There's people at Google, who, who are working on their AI team, who are fully aware of the risks. But unfortunately, are also fully aware of the fact that the context that they're in is a race to the bottom game theory, meaning if they don't do it, then the Chinese will or whoever, most right now is the Chinese and Google who are kind of racing. Even if they slow down, it doesn't really slow down the whole story much cheese that we will need to do because you have to actually build an alternative and it's like, okay, here's if we can get this thing moving and actually create a context where there's a way for people to as individuals to attach from things that they know are wrong. Good. And there's an answer for how we can actually get people who are mutually pointing guns at each other to put the gun, then they will like people will actually step into it. And so here's like, from the middle out, and it feels like you're kind of that's where you orient maybe is. What are the things that we can do now? What are the kind of low hanging fruit kind of simple things that we can do now that are embedding the right whole system in the code? That I think is what I was trying to convey is, is that as you're doing this, it's it's, as far as I can tell, quite important to be thinking about the whole system dynamics, and doing it from the beginning up. So for example, how it's actually a question, I guess, I think on the game be formed just maybe a couple hours ago. How do we curate gaming projects? Like what were the criteria that would indicate to us that a given team is the individuals involved have done enough to be making good choices It's endeavouring to make choices that the project itself is it's asked the right questions, like the questions have been asked, and it's being approached in a thoughtful fashion. 
And there's a sense that the project is happening in a context or an as part of a vision that is itself in alignment meaning, like you said, like you're what you're doing is is not, you don't want to do what you're doing and then sell it to people like, No, no, I'm doing this. And if I can get other people to be doing similar related allied things around me, there's a whole thing that shifts in the context. It can be very, it can be something very small like it's like a couple people say, hey, I want to figure out how to build a new kind of coffee shop, where it's a co op, and so the baristas are actually making a better true income, a true lifestyle, income of the economics of the coffee shop, you might look at it and say, Okay, that makes sense. Like I thought this through, I think the structure you put in place looks like it could potentially work. And you're doing it in a context of really being able to think about how this could play a role. You know, how does this new place play a role in you as a meeting ground for the community, people are coming to this coffee shop and we're actually going to read vivify the notion of people having conversations with each other in this place where the tenor of everything like the like we we have actually relationships with the growers where the growers are part of the co op there's a direct continuity of the whole thing is really okay, that's well thought through it's part of the fabric of the future you can see how this is part of the pieces can start to connect like the mesh means to connect up and the individuals were thinking it they've actually stepped off their high horse they've done they become the people it's intended to they've done the work to at least mostly move in the direction becoming the people thanks Okay. Can be project you're in your somehow in a place where we can begin to support you in in some fashion, you can imagine many, many different factions, right? You could say, in the post crypto World Cup game be currency. And may have very simple like a co op that is a meta Co Op. And one of the characteristics is that everybody who joins the medeco op, buys game be currency so begins to have value. And they endeavor to work with and interact with and parked and buy from service providers who have been curated have been selected, this sort of hits the criteria. And we even have multiple different stages so I can kind of not quite know what I'm doing them stage one. And if I like work with certain people and upgrade what I'm doing, I can become, say stage five. And resources can flow in that context.

Jubilee 43:50  
I do have an option both. What I'm doing, this is like where I'm starting because it's within my capacity and it's essential for any project we create together. And I think it can also be used in the game B space. And I'm working on it with a Philippine Christian to see about implementing it on to another Christian, the one who owns the zoom coffee shop.

Jordan 44:20  
I don't know what the zoom coffee shop is.

Jubilee 44:25
Oh, we're on Twitter. Yeah, you can just hop in it, which was amazing for the first week, because you would go in and have these amazing conversations and then the energy dissipated because you'd go in and there wouldn't be people there. So you have to wait for a couple hours and maybe someone would join you. Right? So it needed. It needs context. It needs a timeline, his schedule to make it function and have those conversations. Yep. And that is what I'm proposing is I came across this concept called the world cafe in the spring time. Do you know what a cafe is? I do. And so I'm looking came to create a platform around that method that isn't for necessarily game be it's for anyone to come and have a conversation around a meaningful question with the threshold of users made. 
So in the beginning, there's one question, but as the capacity builds, we're able to focus on more niche areas. But the idea is a lot of what happens on regular social media, which is this division and this debate and a lot of trolling because you never see someone face to face and you never connect with their energy. And it you know, this platform down where I you know, the President's tweeting out to millions of people. You know, influencer, you have 100,000 subscribers, so you have more say than somebody else, not based on your idea, not based on the merit of what you're saying, but just because you have some kind of celebrityness to you. And you got on the technology right away where that's all seems to be a lot easier to gain that advantage. So anyone can come on, say when they're available in a 24 hour period. And on the half hour mark, they're matched with three to four other people to have a conversation and they can have one conversation, they can have 20 conversations in a row. And in that way, the larger group is also able to have a conversation. 

Jordan 46:24  
And so for I would say, by the way, that there's a game B idea. The content doesn't have to be something that's ostensibly game B. 

Jubilee 46:35
So I don't have the ability to create a central platform. And I don't even know if we should until we have the threshold of people to financially back it and just, like passionately back it right. Like, yes, I want to be on that having those conversations. I think there is that energy and game be based on the coffee shop. And so part of the issue is you don't know when people are going to be there. You don't know what conversations to have because sometimes you're part of a conversation and sometimes you're not part of A conversation that might move game be forward, right? And you're like, no, I wanted to be part of that I wanted to decide on the values together I wanted to. So having what I proposed is having six time slots in a 24 hour period. So that one of them works for you. And actually asking one question every 48 hours, and then on the third day harvesting those conversations to say what were the common things what are some things we can glean and put together do we not twice in a week's period and then on the seventh day, we generate new questions and vote on which to read you read them pretty that's how it supposed to work. On the seventh day, you rest yet that's literally what I've been saying. I'm like, No, the seventh day we rested like or we actually generate new question.

Jordan 47:46  
That's really neat. It's not always clear exactly what the nature of reality is. I've been wondering over the past couple of days of why I chose to create that Facebook thing that I did recently. If you go to my personal identity on Facebook. I think two days ago here, let me read it to you. It's not very long. It'll be easy to grasp. So September 24, at 9:30am. So this is what I said yesterday and notion came to me, it seemed like it might be interesting to try and experiment in collaborative inquiry. So this is an invitation. I see it working more or less like this. First, people in deferring to present ask the questions that are quote unquote, right ones to ask right now. The most meaningful question at this moment. Since we're on Facebook, I imagined this is taking place in the comments to this post, perhaps is a simple protocol. Each distinct question should be its own thread. Second, people endeavoring to further clarify or deepen the inquiry this might show As asking questions about or in the context of questions, for example, as you applies to a given comment, it might show up simply as likes to questions or further rings to help orient attention. My guess is that this piece of the experiment take two three days. So that may not be the case, but it actually kind of looks like it is. You still hear me? Yeah, yep. Sweet. Third, finally, people, at the very least me might choose to endeavor to contemplate some question or questions about a longer form post. As a result of that contemplation. This likely takes place on Facebook since longer form is really robust here, and then will be linked back to this post in the comments. This might take at least a week and maybe much longer. 
Contemplation isn't a straightforward thing in my experience, then finally doing it again, maybe two or three times to see how the overall competence in collaborative inquiry develops over iteration. So that was that thing. And it has produced a very large number of really good questions. Like 90, something like that. A lot of people happened to where are you have too many tabs, I've lost you. There we go, okay. And I'm not quite sure where that idea came from. I was just sitting there. And also the idea was in my head, more or less fully formed, and it had a strong amount of energy around it. So I had to, I had to express it, even though makes a little bit uncomfortable to do something like that. So perhaps it was actually your idea. And I apologize, but perhaps it's useful because now there's a bunch of people who were kind of primed to play this kind of game and a bunch of questions that are already out there with preceding and which ones already landed. So it can be a very, very easy thing to say, hey, Jubilee is kicking off this project already. We're going to be having these conversations in person, anybody. You know, my great over there, get off my Facebook page and space, you know, the next phase of this thing or the branch of this thing is beginning. I think we very much just easy to frankly, it's been helpful.

Jubilee 50:56  
It would be enjoyable, to be part of the conversations. That's a big part of game B, it needs to be is it has to be fun to play for the individual and simple enough that most people can participate. And the way to generate the questions is to make them in a way that anybody could answer them. And nobody has the exact answer, at least in the beginning, we were exploring.

Jordan 51:25  
Yep. And so there's two things that I would add to that there's been pretty decent experimentation around this particular question of inquiry. So it's quite an interesting and useful constraint to require the inquiry deepen, before it stopped being an inquiry, by which I mean we could only ask more questions, like literally as a constraint for the first 30 minutes of this call. You cannot say anything that doesn't end in a question mark. What's the deeper question? What's the deeper question was the deeper question? There's something about what that does to the mind that meaningfully increases people's capacity to be truly an inquisitive, truly curious. If you just force people to ask questions for a while, their mind shifts into a curiosity disposition, that then when they enter and when they exit that, they're still curious and not dogmatic. The second piece is a rotten apple can spoil the whole bunch. It's most people are not very well trained, frankly, on how to actually be in real dialogue with other people, how to listen. How to be curious. Many people default to a certain even as I did, in our call, desire to express things that they have inside them, because we were really heard and so there's There's really just two solutions to that. One is structural, like the one I just gave in terms, you can just have constraints and say ask questions first for the first hour, or have a facilitator who's moderating and managing the human dynamics that are going on. Or you have to have some kind of filter where people who just aren't capable of really participating in the culture. They're not empowered to disrupt. And it's for real, like this just it shows up constantly in any any effort to do this kind of thing. Yeah, meaningful. Like even if you have even if you have meaningful facilitators, it can still be challenging.

Jubilee  53:42  
So I sent you two things on Facebook, one of which is my documents on what I was talking about on a communication platform with game B specifically of how it could work. The other one is I actually have a YouTube channel for the idea cafe, which is the platform for a collaborative conversation that, at least in essence works, because it's a YouTube channel. So like we're doing it live. And there's a lot of like vulnerability, that isn't going to be accessible to everyone. But the platform will be and we'll be using zoom or other existing technologies, we don't have to recreate we'll just like connecting people to those zoom calls, once we have our, you know, preliminary beta platform, but it's looking at the structure of one conversation. So it's like three to five people, you each take turns answering the question, so one person isn't monopolizing the time. 
And even if you're, you know, coming from a space of of anger of projected at the people there, you're still like done at the end of five minutes. And that's still an experience that the group has. The other amazing aspect of breaking off into these smaller groups is that you can't derail the entire conversation. You can only derail a tiny conversation that is a piece of the bigger hole. So It's a lot harder for one person to monopolize it all or one energy to take, you know, like, even if you're going to monopolize the conversation and not follow the rules and not listen for understanding, you can only wreck that one conversation. And the truly wrecking it when then that group gets to learn from that experience be like, we don't like that. How do we mitigate against that in the future? Possibly asking the person who did it right. What? Because I know I interrupt people and sometimes monopolize the conversation. That's why I like defining, I have five minutes to answer the question. That's it, boundary that I am comfortable with, versus even if I'm not done at the end of five minutes.

Jordan 55:40  
There's great structural elements. So and there's an interesting assumption. My sense is that what you're proposing is an iterative learning process where as you go into, I'm part of a conversation with the bad conversation is destroyed. The invitation is to say, Hey, what's the feedback that you might have? How to improve this process so that I'm not disempowered and basically just say, fuck these guys. I'm out of here. But actually, man, I really wanted to have good conversation if we can find some way to solve it. You're familiar with open space?

Jubilee 56:13  
I know open source. I don't open space.

Jordan 56:17  
So world Cafe is one process. There's maybe 50, open spaces and other that's quite well understood and good. And cross fertilization could be dynamic facilitation that might also be helpful. And frankly, some of the innovators like literally the people who invented these processes are on that Facebook thread that I created. For so example, an open space happens is very similar. Actually, there's a question and the phrase, he says, Whoever shows up are the ones who are supposed to be there. So it's an invitation, here's a question to show what you want. That's really actually very helpful filter. If it's not a compelling question, just don't show up. Cool. Then people are spread out into rooms, you randomly move people into small group conversation. 
And the rule of the conversation is vote with your feet. So you're not in open space, you're not obligated to stay in the room, you can leave the room and go back to the common area, you can't go to another room, you can go to the common area. And so, if I'm in a session with five people, one person is monopolizing the conversation, I can just leave. And as it turns out, social signaling is very powerful. If I monopoly in the conversation, literally, everybody just gets up and leaves, I kind of have learned something very deep and fundamental. I figured out how to solve the problem, but I know there's a problem. And then those people can go back to the common area. And once there's a critical mass of people in the common area, they can form a new group. And the flow of people go in and you kind of say, okay, it's going to be 30 minutes in each room. And people flow in and out and you get this really interesting organic movement and over a period of time, the question gets very rich, they considered. I know some people who are just flat out experts in that dynamic if you'd be interested in chatting with them, and I think they're pretty generous of spirit, so they'd be willing to share what they know.

Jubilee 58:13  
Absolutely interested in chatting with them. I love that idea. One of my friends, Daniel, introduced me in a real world space, and he called it circles, which is not like circling that game B talks about. But I love that idea. I don't know how it would work on a platform where it's like the world cafe, I know more like having one question for a 24 hour period. But playing with that and seeing what we can create together because the world cafe could be done on zoom, and a very simple platform and then saying, you know, as I was thinking more breaking off into like, the climate change group has a question for the day, but having it so anyone can generate a question and then you have the people who are interested in it. I don't know how that works with time zones, because part of it is having a global conversation. You're saying I'm available at this time for this question, but maybe you could create it, like I have said for six different time slots, and no format around that. And so it's not like the idea for the platform was it was going to be 24. Seven. But how do you get the threshold of people there to make that an interesting conversation? So you're breaking off into groups. And then this idea showed up of like, well, that for a global population, one of these time periods is going to work for you. And you know, you have 48 hours to come on for one.

Jordan 59:30  
By the way, I think there's actually a formal rule around what you did there. 24 hours, 24-6. When you're doing design of this sort. It's useful to actually be able to do meta design, just to have an understanding of what are the kinds of moves that can resolve category problems. Nature does this a lot. There's something about that like partitioning an analog space 24 hours into a set of smaller spaces that renormalize is you can get the criticality to hit in this in the slots. Yeah. So I mean, it seems to me like the the key is just to have a learning begin to play. Find a way to put people who are energized, skillful people into it. There's a lot of cool folks. They're amazing and crazy, but what are you gonna do? And he proposed, he was actually part of the original game B went off into his clown world. And I don't mean that in any sort of negative sense. I mean, equitably, actually. They've got a whole universe, no games that they play, an active play. Like one of them is to say it's like a values game. Game one is a game where you learn how learn what you think your values are, like one of my biases, say, Tell the truth or respect other people. And so that game kind of gets that surfaced. The second game is an active play, where for a period of time, I have to consciously do the exact opposite of the things that I thought were my explicit values. So I have to lie. Just lie, lie, lie. I have to be rude rude as a motherfucker, right? And this thing happens where you actually begin to realize, Oh, my gosh, that actually wasn't my value. Like my value is actually something deeper and slightly different. But locked into the box. I didn't think about it like they did, maybe 300 games, and a very thoughtful about the notion of how ludicrous behavior how playfulness opens up capacities. actually have a conversation with two of them next week, and you can imagine a cross fertilization whereas the conversation if two or three of the people from that group get involved in the creative process, the creative collaboration of becoming a world cafe or idea cafe.

Jubilee 1:02:01  
A world Cafe is someone else's concept, I'm creating an idea Cafe. That's both my YouTube channel and the placeholder name for the platform we're gonna create together. 

Jordan 1:02:15
Yea, I met the lady who did world cafe once. Vanessa, my wife, studied that whole area for a little while to get a handle on it. We're can be players, we met in that context, our baby as a game B baby. 

Jubilee 1:02:30
Mine is too, though she doesn't know it. Dare to be a collaborator, more so than a competitor, no one else can be you.

Jordan 1:02:38  
And you're getting really good at it. By the way, I'm really appreciating how good you are. And your child's name is Peanut Briscoe?

Jubilee 1:02:49  
It's Aurora.

Jordan 1:02:50  
Aurora, okay. But my grandfather's nickname for me was peanut, which is why it touched me. It sounds like you're going to be doing something that will be fun. I imagine it has real potential. And even if it peters out, it will have petered out really, really useful. And it seems plausible. So to pour people in that direction, who will play with you. It'll collect real collaboration from the middle as opposed to thinking about it. Just begin doing it and seeing what works and what doesn't work. It was depressing as hell back in 2012, to find that there were almost no real collaborators out there. It's amazing now to find it in just seven years, there's a lot of people who have on their own come to these these places and are bringing really amazing insight and energy and capacity and heart.

Jubilee 1:03:52  
I love this space. I mean, game B is a whole other level and having an interaction with this community, but even on Twitter, finding the odd people like remzi through the common planet, who was in game B. And the difference between wanting to succeed together and beating competition is night and day. Like I like joke with him, Who's gonna save the planet first? Even when you're in competition, you're not in competition. Because you want to help each other's project. You want to sign up for each other's project and be like, whoever gets there first. Awesome. Well, and the funny thing is, he actually had the same realization that his project, common planet, it's a Jubilee. Oh, yeah, I'm loving my name right now. This is like what I was putting here to do.

Jordan 1:04:42  
It's a big one.

Jubilee 1:04:44  
Because I didn't name myself but it seems to be embodied in what I'm here to do, in my mission. 

Jordan 1:04:52
So yeah, that's beautiful.