Interviewer 0:08  
For a growing number of futurists, culture analysts and seekers, Jordan Hall has become a keynote of signal in a world of increasing noise. co founder of neuro hacker collective futurist, sorcerer, angel investor, tech entrepreneur. These are just some of the hats you'll find on these various BIOS. hats are interesting, but they are hats. As the matter Jordan shows up the dialogue in combination with the relevance of his thought that is of interest to many. I hope that for many who track the ongoing development of the cluster of memes and names associated with game bead and the integral transformation of self and society that this offers a unique and interesting window into some speculative metaphysics characteristic of the transformation in which we participate. No answers here. Certainly not for me. Hopefully some relevant questions in Transformation though. 

Jordan 1:57
I'm actually entirely a computer deepfake simulation.

Int2:11  
How are you anyway? I mean, look, this is a bit of a strange thing to be doing. How do you feel, logging on and meeting me? I have a lot of respect for people that do that, because there's a sense in which it's stepping into the unknown in quite a real sense.

Jordan 2:30  
For the better part of my life, I actually didn't spend much time talking with other people in general, and certainly not talking with other people telephonically, but something along the lines of improvisation is pretty natural for me. I don't tend to plan what it is that I'm about to do, in the dialogical sense. I mean, I have plans in life. I'm planning on going out to eat, for example, but I'm more of a theater performer than I am a film performer. Yeah. And so I'm actually quite happy to be put into a context where the the conversation actually provokes possibility. Yeah. I feel no interest whatsoever being a message. So, as a consequence, it's quite nice to just have a conversation if somebody wants to record it and share with other people as opposed. That's okay.

Int 3:32  
I feel very similar. I feel actually quite uncomfortable about saying many things to people at all. It's becoming more and more that way. Apart from if it's in dialogue with them. I mean, there's lots of different reasons for that and different things. We could go down. Now. I've So when I load up Skype, it starts recording automatically. Now, we don't have to use anything that just occurred that usually I would say, Okay, now everything from this point will take us the recording. So, yeah, look, I mean, the way I'm looking at this is that the only difference between me wanting to talk to you and have a conversation offline versus online is the simple fact that the mechanism for doing so involves an audience. So in that sense, yeah, I'm good to go. But then there's also going to have to do that this kind of weird, abstract thing where all of a sudden, here we go, we move into that different space. So anytime from when we get to the beginning and this part right now. 

Jordan 5:03  
This thing we're having is out front of other people who are watching right now. 

Int 5:10
Sure One question I should ask, which is how long do I have before? Like, what are the considerations of your time here? I planned in some sense to ask you to begin with. Why are you here? And what are you doing this form? And you've already given a partial answer that the intrigue and dialogue and not being disposed just to speak in that transmission based way from speaker to audience, that's not what compels you, you're looking to engage in some sort of collaboration fundamentally to express what's authentic and what comes up. So perhaps the next question is, what are your priorities in life?

Jordan 5:58  
Well, I think what I might respond to that is actually just think about where do I actually spend my time, just that'll is a nice concrete wave of assessing that. So I spend quite the majority of my time as a parent. So I would say the primary priority is to be a good parent, particularly. So if you add the amount of time that I spend in relationship with my kids, to the amount of time that I spend either preparing to be in relationship or dialoguing with other people about that, then that's probably been the majority of my waking hours are spent in that context. I spend a meaningful amount of time contemplating things. And it seems that the things that I'm contemplating are things that have come up I've I've learned over the past I guess 48 years but over the past 10 years or so, in particular, I don't know a certain approach to how I allow my attention to be directed. even faster, we're on this call is an example of that. So I, you mentioned that I follow my gut. That's kind of a nice simple way of putting it. It's not as simple as that. But there's a way and that brings me into a contemplation and I have a preference for clear and deep thinking. And so, nine comes up and it seems worth attending to it all. I often find myself contemplating it rather deeply. So it's been a lot of my time doing that. Obviously, I have a large amount of hours of my life, but this seemed like a good place to start. 

Int 7:55
Contemplation, deep thinking, following the gut, these three things together, I think, lead us in an interesting direction. Because the kind of thinking that interests me the most, although, of course, I am interested in tight analytic thinking and doing my best to be clear, but it's also what are you thinking about? And just what the fuck you doing? And just how are you discerning between the quality of information that you receive in your life? How are you moving towards the better and not the worse? How are you moving towards that place of self transcendence rather than an ever closing spiral of delusion? There's a sense in which this gut that perhaps you reference here is this more effective, perhaps, and, okay, here I'm going to just chuck a term that's going to introduce a whole nother dimension to this perhaps a somewhat more mystical capacity. What are we following? We're falling feelings in the body we're following emotional orientation. I mean, ultimately bar I'd quite like to get to just to put cards out on the table which an interest of mine and something I sent you, since you share as well as this relationship, this sort of mystical contemplation. But perhaps to make the question a bit more succinct, bit more clear. What are the kinds of thinking that you engage in, that you find most meaningful?

Jordan 9:37  
Exactly as you say. It's an experience that involves allowing a particular mystery to percolate and to embody itself in the capacity to be expressed. So that's the one that I find the most meaningful.

Int 10:17  
You have a blend of expression I respect a lot, which is clarity plus nod to the unknown in a more poetic way. How it comes across to me when I read your medium articles, the method of conveying comes across as quite analytical. But there is a sense in which well, quite explicitly us tenderly expressing out embodying out a connection to the realization of a story in which you're not quite sure the role you're actually playing. And I think there's something profoundly true about that. However, it's in our expressing it and coming into relationships with each other, that we encounter what's at least somewhat required, or somewhat able to help aid our understanding and just what it is we're doing. But it's this time period thing is very, very challenging. over how long should we be taking in? How long is how long is the frame of reference to sort of Judge just what role we're playing in some situation here? And I find that that that problem is a really devilish one. And so actually would quite like to ask you back to the question of priorities What are you what would you like to achieve? in dialogue with people online right now you've been speaking to John Vervaeke. You've had a number of appearances with rebel wisdom. You seem to be from someone who's paid attention to this a lot and from someone who's tracking many of the same memes and looking to embody them in the world to some extent, to bring people together to involve them in conversation, to pay attention to the feeling, along with the words and perhaps the feeling more importantly than the words to attempt to experiment with collective sense making to try and lead in some sense or provide the toolkit, do a little bit of orchestration for something that fundamentally is not yours to orchestrate. That's an interesting thing. So, but nevertheless, so So, so there's seeding something. And then there's also always hang on, I'm not interested in telling anybody a message that they're not interested to participate in that realization with. So it becomes actually quite difficult to speak about what it is you're doing. So I've been up. So that's why the importance is to step in and dialogue and see what comes up. Could you talk a little bit to the lay of the land you see, at a more systemic level, in society at the moment, how the individual finds himself in that and what you believe would would be a success for you, if you can move the needle towards the direction of a better relationship between An individual and a sustainable world.

Jordan 14:05  
Ah, that's a lot. Let's see. Well, the thing that's coming up most clearly right now is a story that I've felt very close to for some time. And it has to do with the notion both that we're in a moment of real change, capital R capital C. And also that this moment of real change is a moment that is that part of a longer arc. There's some some kind of continuity to change as well. We're connected to something there are. There's a way for us to have some relationship with the change that is not entirely comprehensible and so, this is where for example, a lot of the analytic work shows up is actually is there anything that we can say anything that we can actually make available to that part of our mind into our being that can be helpful and useful as we endeavor to go through this and for that matter, just communicating to the people for whom that particular style of communication is their preference. And my deep sense, my considered senses that the the quality, the magnitude and the quality of the change is truly profound. In a way that is very difficult, I think for people to conceive of. Because it is in fact that that true actually, remember be At a very first time I ever went to a place called the Aspen Institute. And there was a gentleman there who'd been the CEO of a pretty significant company. And for some reason, I don't really know the backstory, I had been working on a quotation that he gave at this conference. And in the presentation, he said are it is are considered judgment, that is our assessment for the people who are gathered here, many of whom were actually rather important people capital P, that the information revolution, whatever you want to call that will be on the order of magnitude of at least 10 times as impactful as the Industrial Revolution. Okay, so this was important people. And this was serious people articulating this notion and intended to be taken seriously in a venue where that sort of thing happened. But then I just thought for myself just sitting there in the room, just thinking well.
 Okay, well with that it was actually imply, let's just take a look back here with the Industrial Revolution did across all the different domains of human experience in terms of religion, in terms of how we lived, who we lived with, how we lived our lives, what we thought of as being life, our concepts, our notions, our values, our aesthetics. And of course, the answer is it was tremendously significant in comprehensible in many deep senses, like the people before and after, were as different as each other as a people before and after the Cultural Revolution. And the proposition that you might have an event 10 times as significant, it would happen over at frame frame, a third, a sixth, as much time. What I noticed was that was not taken seriously at all. It was not actually even conceptualized. And I was got curious about that. 
This is quite a while ago, maybe, gosh, 20 years ago now. So I think a part of it is just a natural characteristic characteristic on my on my part to pursue continuity in reality to try to hold as coherent and without as opposed to the illusion or without completion, a relationship with realities and integrity. So, if it turns out that is proposed to be the case that an event 10 times the order of magnitude the industry Revolution Revolution is happening and is likely to unfurl before the end of the century, then, okay, let's just take seriously what that means and run it down all the way to the end. And it has seemed to be the case over the past 15 years or so as I've been engaging in this kind of thing in earnest that certain characteristics of my personality which may or may not be pleasant in all cases are some surface in this particular effort was the phrase I actually learned this from the old Jordan Peterson universe disagreeableness, atmospheric disagreeableness. And the fact that my particular perspective may not be sure, but the people around me, does not. I'm not gonna say in the least, but pretty close swear the perspective that I have, although I listen very closely. 
So it's not that I don't listen to other people's perspectives. It's just the fact that other people have the perspective that the group had the perspective just not in and of itself caused me to believe that it is true. And then I guess there's a just a strong sense that they're wanting to for people to actually be able to as individuals live good lives. for everyone. Ultimately. I certainly have the highest degree of concern for people who are relatively younger. But to just be witness to the fact that we are in a circumstance that we could just without, from my perspective, was that a whole lot of effort radically transformed the quality of life and meaningfulness of life of literally everyone in a way that is not just enduring, but isn't it's very bizarre sense is the only possible way for us to actually continue to last as a species, or at least as a civilization. I kind of can't look away from that fact.

Int 20:40  
Yeah, I think I understand.

Jordan 20:47  
And then I noticed that there's not a Stein, quote, the one that we're not going to be able to, to do the thing using the thing that God is here, right? was particularly hard one for me. I struggled quite mightily to figure out how to do the thing using the stuff that got us here. Can we use excellence and technical capacity to figure this thing out? And it wasn't until In fact, I was quite confident through both theory and practice that this was not possible at all, that I began in earnest the entering into what we might call exploring, true through liminality or being relationship with mystery. And so in that context, there is a an awareness of as you say, like a non sensuality. I'm just listening, and endeavoring to most fully and clearly Express and participate with that which seems to be the most true and There is to the extent that I can nothing between me and that which seems to be true. And obviously, my capacity to do that is as limited as anyone elses. But that's the the notion and is what it is.

Int 22:34  
What role does teleology play in your worldview?

Jordan 22:47  
This is a very interesting question. I actually found myself contemplating it the past three days actually. I think somebody brought it to my attention, was it you? 

Int 23:00
No, I think the relationship between teleology and relevance realization is something that's quite on the pulse. Something I thought a lot for a while. 

Jordan 23:10
I'm very, very excited by the unfurling of old John's work, which is entirely novel for me. Yeah, I've been up at all. 

Int 23:20
I've been studying John's work for about three or four years.

Jordan 23:28  
Oh, wow. Well, lucky you.

Int 23:30  
Yeah, it's fortunate. Well, he had a conversation with Jordan Peterson that's been watched a couple hundred thousand times. I think that was in 2015. And that was my Yeah, that's how I found what he was up to. And I'd been studying Jordan Peterson's work for a couple years before then. And yeah, I mean, what has emerged, right. 

Jordan 23:55
Relevance realization. There was something in you that gave you a sense that this study Jordan Peterson was a worthy endeavor. Yeah. And that as you came across John, it oriented you in the direction of John, to apparently some meaningful extent. Theology needs to be held carefully and actually teased apart. In some very simple sense, it's an obvious foresureness about certain kinds of geology. In chaos theory or complexity theory, we just call these basins of attraction. So if I put the marble at the top of the bowl, I can teleologically propose that it will end up at the bottom of the bowl at night, and there's many, many, many things that have a characteristic where the future is very easy to predict given the current context. And of course, contrary wise, there are other systems where the possibility of predicting the future is in fact zero. Okay. That's a nice way of grasping reality. So there's sort of a meta question or a bigger question, which is, is there something about the nature of the reality that we're currently in? That? Is that the former case? 
Is it more like a basin of attraction is there's something about it that we can use to make strong predictions, or even certain predictions about the future states? Or is it more like the latter case, and, by example, the good folks of the 19th century who teased apart thermodynamics made some very specific predictions about the heat death of the universe. But of course, the notion of Telos is almost invoking a design intentionality that it's an arrow thrown about this I do not know. I simply do not know.

Int 26:20  
So what the wheel? What gets things going? And here, perhaps you can correct me, but in my thinking about teleology, telos is something that is difficult to shake off. I'm not sure how there can be an experience of coherence without a multiplicity of things being in relation with one another, by virtue of their capacity to be in relationship ultimately with a higher unity. And the idea that the realization of our nature, whatever is given in our capacity to experience at all, it can be in a meaningful qualitative relationship, that there can be coherence through change, through transformation, that there is coherence to emerge again after the dissolution, after death. All of that somehow has to be nested, if that's not nested in some meaningful orientation, not necessarily to a blueprint of the final thing that has to be in some fixed set sense of end state. But it's like a, the image in my mind is a is a harmonic dance around a continually moving center, but that nevertheless, all those pieces in the dance, gain their coherence impart not only by relationship to each other, but by relationship to the fact that there is a wandering that there is a center which moves. So the whole process itself is what's real. But the real, the real imagination of a point of coherence that binds and draws i don't i got i don't get, I don't get how this can be things that talk to each other that can be in meaningful relationships. with each other if there is not in some sense a continuity, continuity, some sort of unity, wholeness to put it yes homemaking. So my so my thoughts and the reason I find so much resonance with yourself and Daniel Smackdown burger and also forest Landry who I was reading one of his essays on consciousness actually, just before we began this conversation I've just started I just found his his work through. Well, first through the transition video that you put online, which I actually got a small group of people together in a cinema to watch actually a few months ago and to discuss. I mean, it's been a work in progress to get to this point to talk to you, Jordan. 

Jordan 30:02  
I would point your attention to a work of Forrest [Landry's] called the effective choices. I get the feeling that would probably be the one that would be the most relevant to you.

Int 30:17  
Well, in that video, he says love is that which enables choice. And I can get in touch with that, I believe. How do you respond to that notion?

Jordan 30:37  
Well, that's actually a very big question, because it requires we first be mutually grok love and mutually grok choice, a way of grasping and sharing something which is almost at the level of participating in consciousness together.  Oh, my heavens that is extraordinary, see, that's a very large thing.

Int 31:21  
I can read something out that might help you if you like, something you wrote. 

Jordan 31:30
That's always fun.

Int 31:28  
Yeah. Perhaps in a bit of a roundabout way and I am shoehorning this in. But you know, everything's connected. pops, it is not that we need to become conscious of power, but that power needs to become conscious of power of becoming self conscious of power itself. Go back and look at the five orders of power or the five. Being able to create values, no longer dependent upon pre existing and inherited values. One can transcend the existing Power Systems and begin bestowing value, creating new evaluations, new distinctions, but if this is outside of the power systems, from where does this power to create values come, power looks like a geology, plate tectonics. The values and power systems that distribute them are at the surface, but that is all that they are a thin surface resting on a molten core. Occasionally, this core will erupt and a form of power will break through the surface which is entirely new and different. Occasionally ebbs and flows in a subterranean world will determine that huge chunks of the surface will break apart and flow. Occasionally, someone will dive down deep deep into the heart of the world and tap into this source. Here in lies power with a different name entirely. Culture is powerful, but it is also many voiced. Moreover, all culture rests as a thin very thin skin upon the molten core of our human inheritance forces that work And when the pyramids were conceived, rise up to ensure that will fulfill a destiny that is beyond our civilized vanity.

Jordan 33:12  
I haven't met that guy in quite some time. I wrote that on a train in 2002. Wow. And now to connect that to what Forrest raised. Yeah, it's humility. I think his word comes to me there. the humility of really recognizing the degree to which that called let nothing come between me and love means stripping yourself down of all that which you and anyone else ever has constructed. And being naked before. Georgie, before essence and the holiness then of this notion choice. Yeah, imagine this, we're thinking about this, the idea of free will. The notion that we're the question of whether whether whether we do or do not have free will, to me a very profane question.
Much more meaningful, I think, is to stand amazed at the fact that that which is we is nothing more or less than choice which of course that would allow us to hold the concept of sacred, somewhat simpler, sacred is to enable choice to enable choice to be furthered. And then we can do the construction thing which is love is that which enables choice. We can maybe breathe in a relationship with the feeling of being connected that sense of wholeness he referred to earlier. The feeling of being part of a continuity and also the feeling of being each of us a moment, a very precise moment of choice. We are involved that is meaningfulness.

Int 36:20
Putting boundaries down and stepping off again into the unknown and disconnection becomes and is of course a part of enabling choice. So, we, in this way, love is also letting go and sovereignty, perhaps then I mean not perhaps it is then the capacity to Reconnect and reorient once you've departed, at least to some degree, but it's this mystical capacity to connect back up again. It's like okay, what? What's that thing, and love and affirmation. Right. So, that which enables choice but, but that is not always my experience of, of love precisely. I mean, it's, I mean, maybe I'm thinking about that in the wrong way, like, love isn't just the sort of abstract reflection of enabling someone's choice. It's only you know, an embodied continuity with a god here and now.

Jordan 37:59  
Maybe we can add the notion of discernment. If you had the notion of discernment, and you think about the context of So what I mean by discernment is a faculty or at least a part of the story, a part of the notion of discernment as a faculty for being able to make. It's a relationship with being able to make good choices. So discernment helps us make good choices, effective choices, enforced language. And it's, it's complex, meaning that it's nuanced and subtle and diverse. And it's listening to or perceiving the whole. So to see it, in fact, precisely the faculty of of that is able to proceed the whole and to allow The whole to express itself into choice. So if you imagine as a parent and your relationship with your child and you're using discernment, in making the choices, the parenting choices, to the degree to which you are able to truly, truly, really listen in deeply with that faculty of discernment, two things will become quite clear. First is that you will constantly be finding all of your choices are orienting in the direction of supporting and enabling the choice of your child building their capacity to make choices. And second, you will then know that this is in fact love. That is what love is. So, you are acting as a conduit You are a relationship with and acting as a conduit up and expressing so some of the Way of maybe feeling making more concrete, a little bit more embodied.

Int 40:11  
Yeah, I hear you. And I resonate strongly with all of that. Just trying to think whether to track back and clarify my sense of love as an affirmation in relationship to that or just to move on. There's a sense in which I mean love as an affirmation as the, like the bedrock Ember, from which your sort of acceptance of that pre given will to participate becomes then a valuing of your capacity to participate and therefore make choices in relationship and connection with everyone else.

Jordan 40:58  
What I think I hear you saying perhaps, and in my lexicon, I'm identifying with John's notion of participatory knowing. Sure. Absolutely. So, when you say affirmation, you mean a participatory affirmation? Yes. Or to be connected? 

Int 41:30
The connection, I mean, I don't know where to take this, this is going to be particularly a bit out there but the connection then between the participatory knowing and the systemic or abstract formulations that become guidelines fixed structures. Security structures of behavior. This then becomes very central to the challenge, and maybe move us in the direction of what you take the requirements of an emerging meta psycho technology to be?

Jordan 42:25
Damn, this is deep water. This is intense. 

Int 42:27
Well, you only gave me an hour.

Jordan 42:29  
I don't think I could survive two hours. Okay, so let me make it very practical. I was having a conversation today with a group of collaborators and we're really deeply looking at exactly this question. Obviously, it's pretty much all I do. And we're talking about the kind of cool There will be able to support coherence. And of course, there's requires us to be very aware of precisely the challenge in question of the finger being taken for the moon. For the culture being taken for the thing as to as opposed to the culture of supporting the thing. Cool, this is an extraordinarily non trivial problem. For example, just very concretely, we were conceptualizing two gatherings of people. And already are beginning the process of actually intentionally deconstructing and re expressing the same cultural artifacts in a different mode. So as to insulate the tendency to fetishize. This, isn't it This is just an it's like an immediate palliative to for that tendency. 
One of the nice things that feels like it's a helpful in where we're headed is acceleration. You know, in the early days, let's say 3000 bc or so you can go a couple thousand years with some fetishized cultural artifacts, that were very much not the thing. But the pace of change was so slow that for several thousand years that could be taken as the thing and that would be okay. And part of the reason why we are able to be where we are right now is that the pace of change is accelerated so quickly, that by the time the thing of the time of cultural artifact is is fetishized Things have moved on. And it's that that metaphor of the thin crust on top of the molten lava, the temperature is increasing. And so once you have actually achieved a velocity of change that is adequate to cause the ability of the lava to never be able to become solid. And it's a culture that is premised on itself being renewing. Let me see if I can do this right. It's almost there. There's a location in culture space that has a relationship with the way that culture enables intelligence to modify culture, such that the pace of change is high enough that it is impossible for intelligence to fetishize culture. Because if it does fetishize culture, it evaporates into obsolescence or extinction in such a rapid timeframe that it is a non viable path. Does that make any sense?

Int 46:02  
Yeah, perhaps it could be something like we all are, in fact, participating in an improvisational sketch. And well, you've got to improvise and not just repeat what was improvised the moments before.

Jordan 46:18  
Once you've actually dropped into an improvisational mode, and that's a very good way of putting it. So we are in the process of shifting from a scripted mode to an improvisational mode. Yep. And there's something about once you shifted stapley into improvisational mode, you discover that the kind of mind that responds to improvisational mode is also a kind of mind that can keep the improvisational mode integris. Rather than devolving back into a scripted mode. That's the key. It's through recognizing the poacher in my are co creative. And there's a move where there's a mind that's able move us into a improvisational culture, which then supports the kind of mind that would be an improvisational mind that then stapley maintains the flow because there is something about the improvisational space that is in fact actually stable. Meta stable. 

Int 47:16  
The stanza from Shakespeare, All the world's a stage and all the men and women merely players, they have their exits and their entrances and in his time each man will play many parts or something like this. The dance is like a meta realization of performance and we are performing all along.

Jordan 47:45  
And this is also brings us back into to the ology. Because it is in fact quite likely, that if this meta stable state is then the arrow throw In that direction is at least as old as biological evolution.

Int 48:06  
Okay, then we're going to start talking about the relationship between the biology and the metaphysics because the archetypes, at least as old as the biological lineage, as far back as what has been encoded into the adaptive patterns of, you know, dissolution and reintegration and transformation over time associated with that, but well, what sort of metaphysical process enables us to make sense of? Like for me, the line between psychology and metaphysics becomes blurred, and then you end up with images of mandalas and many faces of God. And what are you going to do, just draw a circle in the ground? I'm knees on the ground, mouth open, hands back for all of that. 

Jordan 49:06  
But I was gonna say that's probably much closer to what you're gonna do. 

Int 49:20
To some extent, the sense of wonder and group interactions that may be helpful to model, so effective generative, loving, communication and transformation is present and speaks to the manifold dimensions of the collective psyche as expressed to different degrees and individuals who might be watching or participating would be something like a good story. Something like a good play where you have in fact, many characters. So, and it seems like this is happening naturally. And to the extent that some characters are left out of the play, some people get mad.

Jordan 50:52  
Our stories need to get better. And you can even say, it's probably going to look like a story that looks like a story that tells the story of a story that begins to look very different. My friend Jeff Gomez has talked about it as the transition from the hero's journey to the collective journey. So imagine a story, be very concrete. Imagine a Netflix original series. Cool. It's got a script, it's got characters, it has a relatively small number of characters. Certainly not a billion. But the story tells the story of how a group of people figure out how to empower themselves, to empower other people to participate in collaborating. And in the act of watching and proceeding this story, People are inspired to imagine that perhaps something like this might happen, only to discover that a group of people are in fact, figuring out how to empower themselves and how to empower other people, some of whom choose to join, and to begin participating in telling their own story. And of course, because this entire story is the story of love, they are furthering choice. They are enabling still more people to become aware of and to choose to participate in the expanding wavefront of this new collaborative culture we've been talking about. That seems right to me, something like that.

Int 52:52  
Certainly would make for a good story down the line if we speculate that there are multiple communities in a somewhat decentralized way, participating in the CO creation of stories for them to in fact be enabling choice, they must remain in appropriate connection with all the other nodes doing the same. Where and there's something I mean, there's something very interest. So, there's another store as a meta story like what like the mechanism, something that scares me and this is more of a mystical thought sort of is the development of particular, like, could some of those little nodes cluster towards the propagation or the support of One particular face of the gods of one particular God, like that would be a God of a Greek play or something that was more associated with that particular play than another. And then and like, fracturing like how the different clubs can be, can come in together at a different level and be coherent with one another in participation appropriately around the whole connecting, there's the mechanism of choosing, realizing what should speak for the group still remains important to the extent that we have coherence between all these different communities. So the MIT but the mechanism of movement within like within levels and then moving up is still that has to be there and source standard that's um I had nothing I've nothing too sensible to say about any of this so she might be able to tell.

Jordan 55:20
I liked watching the the process in real time that I felt like you were actually doing some really good stuff. What was sort of stirring within me as you were expressing yourself was, it's definitely not going to be paradigmatic mind. Definitely not going to be egoic consciousness. So that helps.

Int 55:54  
God, funny, the word God, um have you encountered people in your life that the description of Christ inflation became one of the more salient things to use to describe such an individual. Jung speaks about an inflation of the Christ archetype. This fundamental unifying archetype in some sense of the self experienced as a sort of imagistically as Christ, it's that God complex. So we're talking about the participation in certain things from not being from a purely a gothic space. And if I say that's the right way to think about it, not purely ago it because to the extent that the structures I mean egos required for that to be structure maintain that I'm aligning with perhaps you could talk about paradigmatic mind and then what the alternative is, that might be a way to concretize some things.

Jordan 57:30  
Since you mentioned for us, I was just pointing to the distinction between the omniscient and the transcendent. Really, I think just for you, if anybody else out there who happens to be proceeding this goes in that direction as well has Ah, but it's that is not a simple path. So paradigm is simply a model right? So the the country structure of a semantic framework that has an extrapolation actually, of an axiomatic that identifies the truth value and the good value of any given utterance is a paradigm and paramedic mind is a use of the human mind that is trained in the good use the effective use of a given paradigm. So, it, it understands the axiomatic or at least it's able to generate utterances that are good and true in the context of the axiomatic it may not in fact understand the axiomatic sutala is just have been trained to be able to, to know what is a good move in the in the axiomatic game. 
And so it's schematically can be very effective perfect medic line, it has the ability to stand on the shoulders of giants without necessarily either a owner in the Giants would be doing anything creative on its own, but therefore can be very well again effective if I've a good fit to me a very nice clean example of paradigmatic mind might be something like pushing the like button on Facebook post. 
If you notice that that like button is a piece of code that don't have the slightest idea what's happening underneath, nor do I have the slightest idea of the history of what gave rise to the capacity of say, for example, creating the JavaScript that enables that button to be actual, real time As opposed to static HTML looting period periodically, you know, etc, etc is a, you know, an enormous pile of stuff that has been built inside the paradigmatic structure that enables this particular act on my part that I can actually understand within a relatively narrow band of understanding capacity and execute on to deliver desired results that cascade out into a larger system. So it's a very machinic kind of thing, paradigmatic mind is, and it's extremely dependent upon the machinery of a given society. So it's important to recognize the paramedic mind is fundamentally connected to associate to a social fabric that is simultaneously building and constructing the systemic dynamics the paradigmatic mind is operating on and is incorporating the characteristics that enable productive megamind to be functional. So it's a whole complex, it's not a simple thing. I talked about the blue church for example topologically the blue churches and instantiation of pragmatic mind. There are other possibilities of course, but it's a particular instantiation and then if we want to, so so why why might not be possible, prepare dramatic mind to be the thing that does what you were talking about.

Int 1:01:50  
Just how radical is creation?

Jordan 1:01:55
The most. The very notion of radical, which implies the notion of change, The notion of not being connected casually to the past. Creation is completely radical. It is ad nihil, creation in its essence is absolutely unpredictable and has no causal connection to the past at all.

Int 1:02:28  
Is it conceivable that an instance of radical creation loses all capacity to participate with that which came before it?

Jordan 1:02:51  
Yes, I would say it's not just conceivable, but that it all around us. I would say even the The most fundamental characteristic of the world that we live in is the epic phenomenal or the the buzzing blooming confusion of these subtle radical moments of creation that don't quite land and don't quite percolate into a deeper environment in reality.

Int 1:03:30
That are not graspable by the analytic mind, but also not able to be in relationship with the impetus for creative generation itself, that we are in relationship to? That is very radical. 

Jordan 1:04:04  
I noticed it everywhere. There's a puripotency just beyond the horizon. And it is feels a bit like like reaching out but not quite connecting.

Int 1:04:23  
How is there a conflict between that accepted realization and maintaining a commitment to the unique value of all human beings?
Seems to me that the system of communication of participatory community we're speaking about is one which values both the sovereignty of the individual their unique piece that unique signal, but simultaneously their connection, their interconnection. If we are to endorse a ontology of a certain radical creativity, radical novelty that admits the or makes possible the kind of leap in evolution that will by necessity some experience before others Some are in relationship with when others aren't. Yep, What I'm interested in and what it seems to me to be the case or what I'm my find it deeply concerning that for one, universe of care to exist in isolation from another, it's this if some can be here, and there is this novel gap that we lose touch with, I, I don't know how I don't know how to pose it. Something in my mind anyway, is triggered that like there's certainly a there are some pieces I have some commitments that I care about that are that are challenged by an attempt to incorporate a notion of a certain sort of radical creativity. That is not relatable to in our capacity to bear up at the very least to transformation and to realize a relationship with it. It comes back to this point about how there can be coherence between things like there is it like a breakdown in the fundamental interconnection between things?

Jordan 1:07:25  
Let me just throw some more words at the problem and see if more connection happens. What I would do is make a distinction between potential and actual. Because this just truly radical creativity cannot be realized. It cannot be shared, it cannot be connected with then it remains in the potential does not render into the actual right Yes, I'm the one that that at one of three things can happen. One is that's just the way it is. Just kind of stays that way. Yep. Another thing might be that there is a Kevin accretion up where something about the real has changed, such that the connection can be made. And this radical creativity is ever so slightly left radical and therefore can be brought into relation with what is and therefore to be realized and made it to actual. Or the opposite is that some shift may happen in the nature. No, no, actually just those two things. The third is just a second. So you might even just call it a path. 
Not yet is maybe a way of thinking of it, rather than not if it happens for run for one, does it happen for all? No, no, in fact quite the opposite. Every singularity, which of course, you are a singularity, and the Singularity is completely unique in this fundamental relationship with creativity. You might even say that a large part of the work is in our transforming that and adding to that, a capacity for that to become more real by being more shared. So, is what's happening right now is exactly this process. You're proceeding through your singularity, a field of potential that is entirely singular to you. I'm perceiving a field of potential is entirely senior to me, to the degree to which I'm able in myself to be able to breathe bringing that into a reality in just myself. And then can find a way to express it in a fashion which can render it shareable so that you're then able to perceive that in yourself. We've actually now bridged the gap and made it more real.

Int 1:10:21  
Yes, I hear you, I still have a few things knocking away at me. It's like, well, if we're to dance together, then there is a stage or a setting or аrena in which we are doing that, which itself is involved in the transmission. Yes, therefore, that seems in conflict with the notion of complete isolation.

Jordan 1:10:58  
Well, I didn't say complete isolation. Okay, I said singularity okay. So, in relationship between self yourself and pure creativity, there is absolute uniqueness we might call that symmetry meaning not to continuity in relationship between yourself and myself there is continuity. So, there is connection that is as fundamental, as there is separation, both connection and separation are fundamental. And then there's relationship, which is even more fundamental. And that's, for us deepest point actually, is exactly that, that the relationship is more fundamental. And that's the process of the real the real is the bringing the separate into relationship with the continuous tricky business Actually, this is this we're getting into some very esoteric metaphysics that to be perfectly frank would be better better to have a forest with me.

Int 1:12:07  
Well, maybe I'll have that opportunity in the future. That sounds like it would be very fun.