Jack Murphy 0:02  
Alright, and we are back. It is jack Murphy, you are on the jack Murphy Live podcast. You can find me on Twitter at jack Murray live at the website jack, calm. Amazon. com for Democrats are deplorable, go out there and get the book. Today we are just going to drop all that and get straight to it. I've got a guest with me that has been very influential on me in my writing. I cite him heavily and democrats horrible, especially around the discussion of blue church and red religion. And his name is Jordan Hall. And he is a tech CEO from the early days been around on the internet since it was really coming up. And he spent a good bit of time writing about his his viewpoint and situational assessment of the world that we live in today. And we are going to just jump right to it. And so Jordan, thank you very much. I really appreciate you coming on. You're welcome. 

Jordan 0:51  
It's my pleasure.

JM 0:51  
All right, awesome. So one of the first ways that I came across your writing was with the situational assessment. Trump right And so I went, I read that one. And then I went back to the 2015. One. And if we could just sort of introduce the listeners to the concepts of the what were included in the situational assessments, I think that'd be a great place to go like, how, how did you come to write those? And sort of my first question, and what was your motivation? And then, you know, maybe if we could just sort of break down some of the basic concepts were in there and then sort of move forward and apply it to the world today.

Jordan 1:24  
Sure. So I think probably the best way to begin is just to begin with the proposition that I happened to be a somewhat unusual person, certainly somewhere on the spectrum and had a childhood that was, I think, largely partaking in what you might consider late 70s, early 80s, nerd culture, so I had a very healthy dose of say dungeons and dragons and comic books and science fiction and science and early computers. So I was actually involved with computers as soon as PCs happened and all the kind of dense that makes someone's personality and psychology. But in kind of the language that Eric Weinstein has used in order to simply survive in the world that I found myself and I had to figure out how to build a kind of a bespoke sense making capacity, just to just to make sense of what what the hell was going on around me. The tools that were headed to me just didn't work. So I had to start getting pretty good at building my own tools. 

JM 2:30  
And, please, sure, so since making it something I think we're going to talk a lot about, and can we define what that means? I think it sounds sort of self evident, but I think there's a lot more to it.

Jordan 2:38  
Sure. So what we can do is we can say that, in the beginning, there's perception. Well, in the beginning, there's reality. So you find yourself in reality, and one of the things I think we should maybe notices that reality is, is vast, and reality is mysterious. I actually oftentimes use William James phrase the blooming buzzing confusion, if you really just allow yourself to notice, reality is much more complex than we adults and I'm gonna give it credit for watch a small child in reality, you'll get a sense of it. So the beginning is reality. And in the context of reality as an individual, your first person experiences you'll notice you'll be having some kind of experience will be proceeding things. And your perceptions are, of course, a lot or the notion of five senses is an old story, there's thousands. So you've got a lot of different perceptions. And one of the things that you'll have to deal with is that you have vastly more perceptions that you can possibly deal with to make choices. So the objective is to figure out how to be in relationship with reality in a way that is let's use evolutionary language.

JM 3:59  
So if I could just interject real quick so what what you said five senses, we have a lot more than that one of the things that I've read that you had written was that the body senses things much more so than the, you know, our prefrontal cortex and that's something I actually wrote quite a bit about in the book as well too. So what can you can you can you tie those two concepts together then also you mentioned that your sense maker you felt was broken and I was born in the mid 70s. And it was a product of you know, early media and 70s and 80s I played dungeons dragons comic books, I played on Commodore 64 computers, I remember saving saving programs on audio cassettes and you know, I wrote 10 you know, print, print jack 20 go to 10 I thought it was a great greatest thing ever and all world. So I played with basic from you know, early on in my dad actually was a data processing guy and so I had access to email in like the 80s and We, he used me as a way to be like, Well, can these other guys, you know, is this easy enough for professionals to you. So I've been sort of in the similar situation as you and I feel like my sense makers broken too. So maybe if you could explain what that sensation was for you, and then maybe tie it also together with our powers of perception of this vast sense of reality that's out there, in store.

Jordan 5:22  
Okay, so, so we've got perception. And just to very quickly speak to the notion of the body. I think anybody who has learned some kind of embodied skill like that juggling or even just catching might have maybe even a sense of wonder at the fact that you can throw and catch a ball. That's a serious fucking deal, like try to ever try to do the actual math. It's not trivial, right? And so there's no frickin way that your prefrontal cortex is doing a differential equations to estimate the projection of a ball in the air, but your body has the capacity to relatively quickly and relatively effortlessly learn how to do that. And then of course, if you spend some time Do some really interesting things.
And even children have the power to do that. I mean, I played catch with my son since he was a little kid and he can gauge 20 feet, 30 feet, 40 feet. I mean, it's incredible. It's incredible, right? So that's, that's one piece that's the recognition is that there's a certain vastness to the possibility of perception. And then we find ourselves in the world with a almost instantaneous need to figure out how to deal with the world. So to navigate as an infant, you have to figure how to do things like move food through this tube of your body in a way that causes as little pain as possible. And then keep it coming in the front end, right? So we are immediately cast into having to figure out how to deal with it. And so this notion of sense making is just saying, Okay, I have reality, I have my perception of reality, how do I make sense of that perception? 
How do I convert or compress that vastness of perception into things that I can do with that will help me make effective choices in the world. And we could talk about this in terms of very step by step like literally The eye, the retina is a process that converts the broad spectrum of light that is literally bouncing off the back of the retina into just that subset of the frequency of electromagnetic radiation that the retinal cells can be sensitive to, into the subset of that, that the optic nerve brings into the visual cortex. And then the visual cortex, of course, is doing a huge amount of work trying to take this raw signal from two different eyes, and then convert that into the stuff that we see. Or at least we have the capacity to choose to see if we put our attention at it. And, and then its course percolating through other parts of the brain to try to identify what matters and what we see. Right. So this process from the point of vision, right, and, and one of the themes, I think what you just mentioned was filtering to write like, massively. Yeah, massively, massively, massively.
Right. And that's sort of what's being affected in many ways. I mean, I'm not going to jump ahead here but like media filtering information, your body filtering information, every everything and sort of filtering the infinite amount of information to figure out what is accurate. What is important, relevant, useful, always interesting signals. Is that relevant to sense making like your filtering capabilities?
What's its irreducible? Almost all of your perception is thrown away. So the question is, how discerning is your filter? To what degree are you identifying the aspect of reality that is meaningful and to what degree you throw away the aspects of reality that are not meaningful, given the fact that you're throwing away almost all of it? So, you so suspect, right, so let's, let's then maybe do two things at once. So one is, my personal experience was one where it's not necessarily that my sense America was broken, but rather that culture, the culture that I had been born into, or the society that I had been born into, had a particular way of trying to accelerate the development of my sense making, giving me frameworks education, and looking at stuff like that, that didn't work for me. And so the prefab toolkit that our culture, to some extent, tries to give to the younger generation to the younger generation as tools that they can use. just didn't work for me. So I found myself in a circumstance where I had to do it myself, I had more fully, sort of individually as an individual step into reality and kind of build my own sense making frameworks bespoke. And this showed up a lot. For example, the notion of being an entrepreneur as opposed to say, being a businessman. 
This is man is somebody who can for him, the machine works who can step into a place, turn certain cranks and be able to do that with with what Eric calls excellence. And oftentimes entrepreneurs or people who can't, like literally that road is just not meaningfully available to them. And on the flip side, if they have gotten to a point of some level of adaptive capacity of their own bespoke sense making is gotten to a high enough level and Za kalsa see things that other people can't see and can maybe actually have to have learned how to be willing to take risks because the easy path wasn't available. Like they couldn't, they couldn't just learn what school was teaching, they had to go out and stake out new ground. And so, for me, being an entrepreneur, being a tech entrepreneur, was part of the same process. And I was using a lot of those same developing frameworks that bespoke sense making in that same context, I was making sense of the inner the relationship between digital technology and the analog world to try to identify where opportunities might lie. 
And how, for example, networking technology intrinsically changes the relationships between people and how power human relationships, congregate and create groups that make choices together. differently than what happens in a place where broadcast TV. So noticing that, like literally just being there president has it evolved from watching how it changed. And then then my mind trying to figure out why like building framework to try to explain what I was observing in my life, and that I was having to respond to because that was the, the, my job, my job was actually to be good at figuring out how these things are going to happen. And having my skin in the game, if I made a bad choice as an entrepreneur, I was going to lose. So the the adaptive framework was was Stark. And so that happened in 2007. I exited my third company devex and more or less retired and spent a lot of time just just watching and learning and just exploring the world with my I wouldn't say ill gotten gains my well deserved.

JM 11:49  
Well deserved. And on that note, I think I read also that you are one of the few people to start up, get initial offering and then bring public companies all right.

Jordan 12:00  
Yes, that's right. I was involved in three startups that were from beginning all the way to IPO. And the third, I was the co founder and CEO. And it went from an IPO on NASDAQ. So from zero from nothing this all the way to IPO, which is, you know, that's a fun game.

JM 12:20  
But I think that speaks to your ability to create new frameworks and move through those different different zones that you were talking about, which is like the visionary versus the, the day to day businessman.

Jordan 12:31  
Right. And I think just to give a little bit more sharpness to it, I wouldn't say that I'm particularly good at it. So to the graduate students any success in nerves to both lucky timing, and to maybe some, some insight that was helpful, that gave me an advantage. So I spent a lot of time like, I really delve deep into all kinds of interesting things like complex system science and whatnot. And the financial crisis that happened right afterwards gave me a very interesting opportunity to get a sense of Yet another taste. I was involved in, say the emergence of crypto with Bitcoin not too long after watch that as it evolved.
And as the 2016 election started to play out some friends, I just noticed that as, as incoming sessions with friends of mine, that I had a perspective that a they didn't share, and be they thought was actually rather interesting. And this is like the straight truth in order to just simplify my life so that I didn't have to repeat the same story. Too many people. I sat down at about seven hours cranked out the first situational assessment 2017 medium post with the, you know, the basic sense that I would get, I don't know, 500 or 600 people would read it, and it may or may not be somewhat useful to them.

JM 13:52
In 2015, I think, right?

Jordan 13:55  
No, no, 2017 I had written a previous one in 2015 that was A different kind of object had a different. So 2017 This is 19. Yeah, 2017 was competition, right? And little just laying out, hey, here's the way I'm thinking about this story. And as it turns out, that was well received, like a quarter of a million people read it. And so we can kind of go from there. But that's that's sort of the story that brings us to the point of how that particular object was or why it was created. Right?

JM 14:30  
If I remember reading the 2015 version, you laid out four elements about the future, I think, if I can remember call them Muslim, push back against globalism, strain in the financial markets, and a couple of others that I believe sort of evolved directly into the 2017 version where I was reading the 2015 version, and I thought to myself, he predicted the rise of Trump like figure in 2015. And in 2017, you are writing a story explaining why did you Yes? Did you feel like a Trump like figure was on his way as early as 2015? Well, I would say that I expected Trump like figure since 1990-1996.
And it's not I mean, it's in some sense, it's pretty obvious. So it's just a matter of having a model or a framework that tries to make sense of, of how culture evolves, and how politics, which of course, is this sort of epiphenomenon of culture shows up in that context.
So I can go into that if you'd like, but we can also-

JM 15:00
I would love that. Also, could you explain the word epiphenomenon coffee? No, it's totally fine. I think I've read it a million times, but I couldn't use it confidently in conversation. And, you know, my listeners are very smart people and they call From walks of all different walks of life, but you know, we're all about trying to learn as much as we can and to help us make sense, right? That's sort of like the whole gist of the podcast is help make sense of the world. So That's right. That's right. So what do you mean? What do you mean of that culture is an epi fun not know politics is an epi phenomenon of culture.

Jordan 16:22  
What I mean is that culture is more fundamental. And that politics arises, you might even say, like, on the surface of culture, so that while politics is real, and has its own characteristics and feeds back on culture, right, politics can shift culture. Culture is more fundamental. Right. I think we've also heard that quote, several times that politics is downstream downstream from culture. Yeah, this is a very another way of saying the same thing mixed up that that maybe implies that politics has no capacity to shift culture and that's not right. These things are very complex, they relate to each other.

JM 17:03  
Right? So what was it in 2017? What were the issues that you were seeing? Let's break down the situational assessment because that was hugely influential to me. I also dove then into the sort of XSplit explanation of the blue church at that point. So, let's break that down the 2017 situational assessment.

Jordan 17:20  
Okay. So I think probably the best way to start is to, to acknowledge that I have a particular perspective that well, history happens. That's the first. What I mean by that is, I mean, that should changes. Things that we're we're going along for maybe a very long time suddenly stopped being around and new things happen. I found I had to be very clear about that, because I noticed many people, mostly people from the political class didn't seem to have that notion, right. For some reason. They seem to think that what happened last year is what's going to happen next year. So being aware of the fact that sometimes things are different some things, things really do change. And when they change, they can oftentimes change in quite unpredictable ways. So that's the first proposition. 
Second proposition is that we right now are part of a very large change, many different large changes, and they're all kind of building to a big one. So I think of it as perhaps say, a big, big wave that is breaking, or a big bubble that is popping. Or if you want to really, really poetic a big bubble on top of the big wave that has been popping break at the same time, it's that big. So for me, the process was trying to go deep. This is why the thing is called Deep code, like go deeper and deeper until you could find what might be the more fundamental things that are showing up as the generator functions of the causes that are giving rise to what we're witnessing on the surface. You know, it's a bit like noticing it's raining. And then perhaps building meteorology is a science so you can actually explain why it's raining and maybe when it might rain.

JM 19:02  
Right and just for my listeners, I think your general thesis is, is what we're at a existential moment in humanity, all these factors are going to talk about have come have come together to create an inflection point that's going to lead to something entirely. Altogether new, maybe terrible, maybe wonderful.

Jordan 19:23  
Yes. Yeah. Maybe a way of making it simply as that if we almost like a Richter Scale of change. You could say like you have a category one event that is a 10 year change in a category to attend event as 100 year change. We're, I would say with confidence, at least 1000 year change, right? So the kind of change that happened between medieval Europe and modern Europe or between the fall of Rome and the rise of Western civilization. I actually Believe that we're at at least a 10,000 year change. So the shift from pre civilization from tribal based human level organization to city state agriculture style human organization, and possibly even larger, of course, it definitely becomes very difficult to, to think about it. But you had to transition say, for example, from Homo erectus to Homo sapiens, which is 100,000 or a million year scale change. And it's not it, if you look at it. If you take seriously the implications of say, artificial intelligence and crisper, the notion that we may be very close to a threshold where we can, we cannot help but change ourselves and our circumstances at a level that is at least equivalent to the shift that occurred when Homo erectus turned into Homo sapiens is actually not that usual, the hard part I think is actually digesting the reality of it, you can grasp it, then you're like, whew, that's a lot. What does that mean? 
And I think being able to, in some sense, just go slow enough to allow the reality of what appears to be the case to settle in, is the real challenge, like, just don't go too fast, and don't close that possibility. So this is the proposition is that we're right now faced with something that is, let's say, 1000 year level change, which is big enough. And it may even be all the way up to a million at your level change, which is quite big. And so as we witnessed what's happening in the moment, that gives us a context that we can use to perceive it. And it certainly isn't something that's easy for humans to manage, is it? I mean, I just got a puppy and I'm getting anxiety over the fact that there's like a new box in my living room, you know?
Well, yeah, I mean, think about it. We're as individuals, you know, already Towards decades, and we don't live longer than about 100 years. So it isn't sensible for us to have built capacities to perceive changes that happened more than 100 years as individuals, which is part of my big thesis is that cultures have lasted longer than 100 years. And so maybe cultures have some capacity built in over time to proceed and respond to changes of that magnitude. And of course, the genome has been around for a very long time. So but now we're going awfully deep. So let's just zoom all the way back to the practical 2016. Alright, so let's take some some tools out of the out of the toolkit. Okay. And the first proposition I would like to make is that there are lots of different perspectives and lots of different frameworks, and many of them are very useful. None of them are going to tell the whole story. So what we should do is we should sort of pull out our toolkit be aware of the fact that we're using a given tool kit, see where it seems to be giving us history. perspective and maybe pick up other tools to do other things. So I'll start with one which is, instead the relationship between technology and culture, and society, I'm going to distinguish culture and society society here I'm going to define as the institutional formal structures that human beings used to get our needs met and navigate reality as a group. Right? So we currently live in a society where we use fiat currency, and interact with corporations, for example, like I go to the grocery store to buy food. So that's a social function. 
And then culture, I will define as the complex process whereby individual humans develop, right so it's about human development going from birth to death, in relationship with nature, and a relationship with him. Goodness and by humaneness I mean both other human beings and society. So you grow up and you watch TV and you see stop signs and you eat fruit, right. And so these are part of your development. And then so that's, that's the individual. And then what happens is as you develop, you then begin to output you begin to have consequences on nature, on reality, consequences on other humans and consequences on society. Right? So it's this complex set of relationships that have both sides are co developing each other. So that's that's culture. Now then technology, which of course is a part of society and a part of culture, human cultures produced technologies, using the instruments of society. But then technologies change the possibilities of how we humans relate to nature, how we relate to each other. And by the way, how we relate to technology, which is that last part, bit tricky, we have to really hold on to that. This is why we get exponential curves. Okay, so this is a bunch, I just unloaded a bunch, but it's important one framework. So the framework here is to say, let's just do the blue church, for example. Okay? 
So we find ourselves in the, let's say, 1870s 1880s. And we had a set of technologies, we had the rollout of railroads, and we had the rise of steam engines, and the beginning of electricity and the telegraph. And these gave rise, these technologies gave rise to changing conditions for how human beings could do society, different ways that we could go about, say, for example, doing food. Now, instead of having to get all of your food from within sort of horse riding wagon distance, food could be produced in Kansas put on a train and shipped to New York City, probably not that far, but you get the idea that shifted the nature of how human beings had to relate to each other. How we could relate to each other, and also gave rise to different qualities of culture, for example, that shifted, massively shifted, if we go from the 1880s. Through the 1920s, where we lived, human beings began to stop to live less and less close to the land, in farms and rural environments, and more in urban environments, right, the great migration of our demographics from rural to urban happened during that time, which changes the context of culture. And if you're growing up on the farm, mostly around your family, and most around other people who you more or less know, for a long period of time. That's a context for kind of culture. Whereas if you're growing up in, say, Brooklyn, that's a different context for a very, very different kind of culture.
For that happened, right. So this is what I call the Victorian consensus. There was a problem. How do we manage this? How do we govern ourselves? In the context of these changes, how do we deal with the problem And take advantage of the possibilities that arise when we can suddenly move vast resources across continental distances that we can communicate almost instantaneously using telegraph. But by the way, not yet telephone, or certainly not television when printing presses have now reached enough ubiquity, that some people have handles on the ability to mass communicate, but of course, most other people don't, these are all kinds of questions that arise and culture evolves right the culture is the kind of thing like like a forest or a species where it is responding to the context that it finds itself in and has so many different ways of you know, because individually the basis, certain individuals find approaches that work and those approaches spread to other people who are trying to learn how to be successful as individuals and culture progresses in certain in certain avenues. 
And so, roundabout say 1910 1920 at least in the United States, England, maybe Western Europe, we found ourselves in the Victorian consensus a way of managing life. But of course, technology didn't stay still. We had moved from trains to cars and planes were showing up. And we had moved from Telegraph's to radio and record players and not too long thereafter TV and just changes things. And by the way, population change to we went from 50 million people to 100 million people. And we started pulling towards 300 million people, was changes a lot. And so as we begin to move in into the 30s, the Victorian consensus begin to break down. And so the crisis that emerged throughout the West, in the 20s, and 30s was a lot. We associated with the breakdown of a mode of governance that was no longer longer adequate to the actual complexity of the real lives circumstances that we found ourselves in a way of operating society that was optimized for late 19th century populations, using trains and Telegraph's just wasn't adequate to a society, early 20th century society using radio and automobiles, and etc.

JM 29:34  
And this crisis you're describing? Is it analogous to the one that we're facing out? Or is it just like, miniscule in comparison?

Jordan 29:43  
Well, let's start with it being analogous. Let's start there. And we'll walk we can actually walk away up and now we're actually entering into a really good space because I've never considered that question deeply. So in a moment, we'll move from a place where I'm telling a story to where you and I are actually engaging collaboration. Excellent, which is, by the way, the medicine Alright, so hold that. Okay. So what happens is, as we begin to move into the post war environment, we begin the process of learning how to engage in a new level, a new kind of new quality of governance, which is very much using the power of broadcast. And here, TV is the best example. But it's not the only if you look at the environment of the post war environment, you notice the broadcast is all over the place. For me, a really good example of school. School is a former broadcast, but that what I mean is there's an asymmetric relationship, which is to say there's a teacher, and there's students, and there's one teacher, there's many students, and the teacher does all the talking, and the students do all the listening, and the teacher is in charge of what's right and what's wrong and the students are responsible for figuring out how to give the teacher what the teacher wants, right? So that's an asymmetric relationship. That's broadcast broadcast is that sort of thing. So you know, if I'm listening to the radio, there's one person singing there may be a million people listening. And I can see back to the radio, but nobody else can hear me.
And of course, television is audio and visual. It's almost like reality, like it simulates our lived experience to a pretty high level. And yet, in a broadcast modality, it's a very different experience. But the experience of Americans in Vietnam was a massive psychological shift, because we found ourselves in a context where we're kind of like, halfway in with Vietnam was happening in our living rooms halfway. We couldn't have agency, we couldn't act on it meaningfully, we could actually experience it to a non trivial extent. And that's, as you might imagine, neither of us experienced that much. extraordinarily traumatic to the individuals into the culture.

JM 31:48  
Right. Do you think at this time period, at least leading up to Vietnam? Was there a level of trust in this broadcast format did Pete people believe that they were getting All the relevant, relevant information at the right time without any sort of bias? 

Jordan 32:08  
Well, I wouldn't say that it was naive. I think that people were were aware of the fact that bias was there. But that there was a feeling of to be congruent that Walter Cronkite felt honest, he felt like there was integrity felt like there was integrity in the in the medium, and by the way, in the culture is crucial, because remember, after World War Two, we came out of a context where the depression world war two were intense shit was fucked up. And so people went back to basics and learn how to be at least to some meaningful extent, reliable, trustworthy. And so TV kind of grew up in that context. And so people who had fought any with Jima were able to have a way of relating to each other across the divide of television that was There's a feeling of Mutually Assured responsibility, let's say, I think that was real.

JM 33:05  
Right. And it's making me think of this word coherence that I think you've used plenty and the way that mass communication enabled us social coherence. Do you think that the coherence was a ground up phenomenon hearing what you just said? 

Jordan 33:20
They're sort of made me feel like people believe what was coming across the TV screen, because of the way they felt on the ground. And then sort of they were able to cohere socially, because of that, rather than the coherence coming down from the TV screen and into their living room and making them feel trusted. I trust this idea at that point,it's going to be both. Yeah. And that's how it works. coherence is actually a resonance phenomenon from both directions. So let's just walk through how the blue church worked. So when I say blue church, what I mean is a, a discovery, an evolutionary discovery, by culture of how to make best use of mostly broadcast modalities to govern And to make choices as a group. So one of the characteristics of the blue church was this notion of vertical meritocracy. So if you're going to be in a circumstance where most people are going to have to listen and only few people are going to be able to speak, it would be best if the ones who were speaking are really good. And so there was a I think, well intentioned effort to find a way to actually deliver on that so that the people who were in charge were supposed to be meritocratic, Lee selected, you put the people in charge of NASA, who are good at going to the moon, or you did just randomly pick people who didn't know what you're talking about. 
You put the people in charge of the FDA who are good at figuring out how to make sure that our food and drugs were high quality, fill in the blank, right, the whole notion of the period of say, of the 1950s through to the nineties. Late 70s was a period of recognizing that in fact, there's a lot to that right if you if you do a good job of identifying who are smart kids, and elevating them into the prestigious universities and do a good job of educating them well, and then do a good job of selecting the most capable, best educated individuals to have the most responsibility, you actually get a quite effective and adaptive governance system that does things like takes us to the moon, and builds the interstate highway system and creates the green. The second agriculture revolution, there's a whole bunch of stuff that happens in the context of what that machine can do that kind of governance system. And then, by the way, that was really like that the the high point, the high watermark of the blue church was in fact, actually, on the high watermark of human collective intelligence thus far, it did a pretty darn good job. And of course, all kinds of hairs but let's ignore those for the moment and to kind of get to where we are, we have to say okay, well, Two different kinds of things happen. Many, by the way, many different kinds of things happen, but I'm gonna focus on two in terms of the relationship between where we are now and the blue church. Okay? One is, once again, just like the movement from the Victorian consensus to the blue church, things have changed. We've moved from a broadcast dominant form of media to a symmetric interactive, which is what we're doing right now. 
The internet is a different kind of thing. And it gives rise to a very, very different way of entering into relationship, a way of forming collective intelligence, and then a kind of coherence, which we're still in the process of learning. We can mention other things for example, just to kind of like show how these perspectives are nuanced. If you think of TV is kind of a mix of an extension of with the with the human body relates to reality. It's a massive hyper certification of vision and sound, which is to say it's like a like a hallucination. TV is like a really, really effective, massive hallucination. We all have the ability to see I Love Lucy, and yet, it's not real, but she's broadcast to us in a ephemeral medium. She's not really into television. And so during the TV year, not only were we living in a context of broadcast, we're also living in a context of fantasy land, where more and more and more of our lives are lived in the context of imagination. The internet has at least one of its characteristics is memory. The Internet never forgets. There's TV instantaneously Forget about it. TV is a flow you're in the moment you're in the present what the hell just happened I don't really care actually, what's gonna happen next is what matters. Whereas the internet never forgets. 
Memory is intrinsically necessary for this new medium and therefore is omnipresent. So symmetric internet Active memory is a different technical substrate for the formation of culture and society. And well, okay, obviously, it's going to change things. And it's going to change things a lot, because it's a lot different in, by the way, a lot powerful. Just so we can kind of get a little bit of closure. And the other thing that happens is the kind of thing that society is, and I'll just call it a complicated system. And for those who are interested in kind of double click on that has a sort of a natural life cycle to it complicated systems, trace s curves, meaning in the beginning, didn't work very well. And then they kind of get figured out and then they're pretty effective, and they're really effective. And then they start to not be quite so effective. They break down. 
And so people figure out how to gain the meritocratic system to figure out how to simulate the notion of who is actually should be in charge, to figure out how to massively abuse the privilege of being the one We're speaking as opposed to the ones who are listening. The ones who are listening, figure out how are rendered dumb by the virtue of the fact that their developmental environment is teaching them that the only thing that they're allowed to do is listen and respond with the quote unquote, right answer. They actually are taught not to have creative agency and a society where people the mass of people are taught not to have creative agency, and where it's becoming increasingly obvious that the thing to do is to seize control over the broadcast capacity, and that gaming the meritocratic system is becoming easier and easier to do is one that is sort of poised for collapse. And what's happening too, so yeah, I'm glad that you clarified on that because as we were talking about the meritocratic system, I felt like in my mind, I'm thinking well, this all sounds awfully naive. In that the powers of our the leverage Power would be solely in the hands of the people that deserved it most. But this notion of the S curve, and then being able to game the system, definitely read that resonance that resonates for us, because that's our lives like we, you and I grew up in the context of watching that happen in real time. 
So we were born, when things actually still worked, okay. By the time we were young adults, it was pretty clear that things weren't working. And of course, all you have to do is just look at the wiki leaks, emails to see the inside of how the sausage was made inside the DNC and say, okay, that's late stage stage corruption. Like it's not even a there's like a kind of corruption where people are sort of aware of the fact that they're corrupt. There's a kind of corruption where corruption is so much the context that people are just thinking, well, this is just how the game is played. Like, it's like corruption, right? Obviously, you you cheat, and it's not even cheating. It's just again, how the game is played. So we were able to witness in 2016 in this really interesting, real time. in the, in the Clinton campaign, the late stage caught fragility and sclerosis and what is called fractal defection by some of my friends of the blue church. 
And witness in the context of what we call what I call the red religion or the Trump insurgency, the beginning of the discovery of this new form, this this thing that is on the basis of what the internet can do, figuring out how it's going to play its game. So both were happening simultaneously. So that's kind of it. Like if you look at 27 2016, my article in 2017, I just said, Okay, well, here's a way of thinking about how the tide is simultaneously going out from the blue church and what that looks like and what parts of it are still going to have. agencies like the deep state, and it sort of left hand the mass media, and what parts are the tightest coming in? Oh, welcome to the red religion. The Trump insurgency, what happens when these two forces relate to each other and how they interact? Is I proposed a pretty good explanation for what we're saying.

JM 42:08  
And now you're saying like, the merit of the meritocracy that was about the best people coming to the forefront to lead us in the best way. And the movie The Right Stuff.

Jordan 42:18  
Right, right. And then people learn how to game that system. And so lesser than the ideal was then seeking power. And then they come up against people that were born of the internet, who are doing what exactly? Are they seeking power, or are they seeking or are they seeking to do things the best way? Well, okay, this is a very good question. So let's, let's see, let's just explore that question. So first of all, the answer is gonna be a lot of different things because a lot of different people. So let's take a look at a couple of different aspects.
One is, there's a lot of just exploration A lot of a lot of people are playing. And I don't mean this necessarily, like frivolously, but they're exploring new possibilities for how to have a level of agency. I mean power, I just mean agency being able to have some sense of ability to do in the world. And a level of sense making in a context where the old sensing making frameworks are breaking down. So asking questions like this, right, yourself will shift the news is clearly not just not helpful, but actively destructive. What do I do? Well, let me start asking questions and you start seeking, you start looking at different I'll read blogs, I'll look at Twitter feeds, I'll try to do what I can in a context where it's almost like a Cambrian explosion of search because it's not well understood yet. 
There's a lot of explore going on. Of course, there's a lot of Express going on. People like to express themselves or net what part of the things that humans do is express themselves and in a context of moving from one person gets to sing. And everybody has to listen to a context where everybody can try their hand at singing. There's a lot of expression going on most of it terrible. But that's because we haven't yet learned how to take responsibility for the possibility of what's happening. Which isn't that makes sense. It's we're kind of like I mentioned the context to say, the Cuban phenomenon. The metaphor of a newborn infant is a pretty good metaphor. If you watch a child trying to learn how to use its arms and legs. It doesn't have any clue what it's doing. So it's just sort of flailing about wildly, but it's getting better fast, right? 
So that's a big part of it. And of course, human beings have a habit of avoiding themselves, avoiding the pain in their lives, avoiding taking responsibility for themselves in their own context. And so a lot of else, other stuff that's happening is people externalizing their agency and externalizing their responsibility using the means at hand which happens to be a symmetric interactive medium to do so. So instead of sucking their thumb and drinking in the the Ambrosia of television, they're screaming at each other on Twitter. Right? You don't when you say externalizing their agency, you don't mean in the economic sense like, of like putting the ramifications of their agency outside of their uniform of university. You mean like, you know, just putting it outside of themselves? Yeah.
Yes. Pretty outside of themselves. Wherever they put it, they put it but the key is putting it outside of themselves. Right. Express Express. Yeah, yeah. And you can say like, people are working through their shit, now increasingly in public as opposed to work into their shit with a bottle of, you know, or six pack of beer and watching the NFL on on Monday night. Complaining at dinner, which shows up differently, right. It's just a different way of that happening. And again, in a context where there's a breaking free breaking Looks like the old structures are simultaneously not working and are best obviously coercive. So there's a whole bunch of people are saying, Hey, I can do stuff maybe I can do something here there's an opportunity for me to expand my local fitness my individual capacity to proliferate and be successful and healthy and powerful and sexy or whatever whatever particular values are expressing themselves to this individual, because the context is shifting. It's a gold rush. It's a Renaissance. Those things are Cambrian explosion possibility.
The Gold Rush continues still right, this is this is still the Wild West, right? None and none of this is settled or or is it settled? Are we still all just exploring and expressing and trying to figure out what the endgame is for this new technology, culture interfaces? from the internet or are we in the end game are we in the mid game is this still are we still infants are now we get into the part that gets actually tricky. Because one of the things that seems to be the case is that we're on an accelerating curve. So it's one thing to be in a context of change. So we things have changed from the 1950s to the night 2010 to 2020s. But it's not just change. It's accelerating change. Wow, that's a very different kind of thing. Because we know we're now not having to adapt to a new context, we have to adapt to the fact that our need to adapt is itself changing, right? 
meta adaptation. That's where shit gets incredibly well, actually interesting to be perfectly honest. So the audience is less terrified. A lot of these questions actually start to become where they go through a really interesting thing where they become meaningless. And then they go to a higher level with a become meaningful again. So we are at the end of the beginning but in a context with the beginning is itself beginning again a new constantly. So lots of things have been settled. But in the process of them being settled, they've actually changed the context of the world such that a whole new set of things are now unsettled. This is a real things Let me see if I can put this in a language that makes it a little bit easier to handle a little bit easier to grasp. So in evolutionary theory, we have the con the concept of a niche. So say like the jungle let's pick a particular journalist be in the Amazon rainforest.
And in the context of a niche we have fitness that agree which a particular style of being an animal or plant is a good choice, right so being a white furry Arctic style Bunny and the Amazon rainforest is bad and so they go away. And being a jaguars. Awesome, so there's jaguars right, so that's the idea. You've got it. You got a nice there's a level of fitness Then as time goes forward, the organisms in that niche, find out where they're kind of relative fitnesses and it settles into what the ecosystem happens to be. And of course the ecosystem creates it is co created meaning that the presence of jaguars is part of the niche for the capillaries, berries, and the presence of Captain berries and sort of the need for jaguars right? So it's not you have to be very mindful of that. Now there's a concept called niche construction. So like say beavers beavers are just sort of sit idly by they build dams, they change the niche with some effectiveness. They they make the environment that they're in more conducive to being a beaver. Well, the notion of niche construction, if you think about what that means, what that means is a an organism that has the capacity to change the niche in some way.
So as the capacity for niche construction increases, you find yourself in a situation where the changing of the niche changes the fitness requirements. If you're a say, I don't know a fish that's in a in a niche that has beavers you have to be able to respond not just to the way that the nice changes from kind of slower, old fashioned, meteorological, like the flow of the river kind of stuff. You have to actually start being responsive to the kinds of changes that happen when a biological organism in biological organism time can change the nice lot faster, right. This gives right rise to for example, the need for intelligence. Intelligence is The ability to change the way you're responding to your niche. behaviorally, instead of doing it genetically, you can change your behavior real time, real time versus overtime, real time over, say what I call evolutionary time or biological. And of course before that you had geological time. And so of course, now we start to get an interesting story, because if you look at the story of Homo sapiens, the story of Homo sapiens is that story. 
It's the story of becoming more capable of responding to changes of the niche, and therefore also becoming more capable of nice construction, and therefore changing the niche and therefore requiring more capability of change or respond to changes in niche, but also therefore becoming more capable of changing the niche accelerating change. So you might say that humanity homosapiens is the experiment of what happens when niche construction meets intelligence in an accelerating rate. Now, I'm not sure if that made it any easier.
Words, right? I mean, it makes sense to me. I mean, we influence our environment, and then the environment influences us. And then it is a feedback cycle. And so we're really good at trying to figure out how to respond to that fact. And that's the key, right? We're, we're this special kind of animal that is that kind of animal. Well, that's we've created the niche that favors our inherent ability to nice create. I mean, that sounds sort of redundant thing to say. But I think that that sort of sums up what we're just talking about, well, that if you said it well, so that means to me that we were actually speaking about the same thing. That's great. 
Here's advantage this of this is symmetric, communicative, medium. So, so then what happens is we say, okay, cool, well, what might be the right kinds of ways to respond to that kind of reality? What kind of way of being in the world what kind of what I call it collective intelligence. If we think about the blue church as a form of collective intelligence, what kind of collective intelligence is in fact, intrinsically most fit in the country. text of this feedback loop between intelligence and deconstruction? Well, that's a good fucking question. Hmm. And I think that is where we are. Anybody who gets that as a good fucking question that could really settle on that and go, Wow, I better think about that, I think is actually looking in the right direction.

JM 53:20  
And so what is the niche that we're operating in where it's feedbacking on to us and we're sort of immersed in this, this dance that spiraling out of control, where where is that niche actually play out in our day to day lives?

Jordan 53:35  
Well, everywhere, it's the relationship between society, culture, and technology. So I'll give you a great concrete example. There's a very good article written by a woman writing for I think, a blog called written form. And she is making the argument that the various entities that are trying to figure out how to respond to cyber war are you not doing a good job. And she uses the Maginot Line metaphor which of course to these myself many times in episode with military Well, I'm going to assume that your listeners are either familiar with military history enough to get the metaphor or familiar with Wikipedia enough to look it up. But the basic idea is you can fight the last war and people often do like shit World War One suck. What do we do let's build ditches warns about trench warfare. Oh, no other way to build a really awesome trench, and that'll that'll be awesome. Oh, shit, the Germans figured out the trenches aren't the thing anymore. Now it's blitzkrieg, and blitzkrieg, totally Rock, paper, scissors. The Trench and France loses in a couple of weeks or so that's the idea. If you fight the last war, then you really set yourself up to be quite surprised when the next war happens to be at your door. Right? Third proposition is Hey, cyber warriors you're trying to fight cyber war with the notion of CYBER WARS a bunch of hackers breaking into Sony's hardware and stealing passwords. But that's not the story anymore. The story now is meme warriors hacking the site guys by shifting our ways of making sense community fighting with each other on decentralized media.

JM 55:03  
Okay, you summed it up right there I mean as soon as you said that that like kicked me right in the guts because i have i've i've lived that I mean I live I live through external forces shaping the my personal is like guy Stephen like breaking it down though there are people on this information battlefield that are distributing disinformation with the express purpose of creating casualties. And I myself have been a casualty of disinformation and people you know, willingly misinterpreting things and weaponizing it and then using their ability to rally forces online to not just have a troll conflict on Twitter but you know, got me fired from my job got me banned from coaching Little League has got me ostracized from my local community and as you know, jeopardize my ability to provide for my family and this is a very real, tangible thing that's happening. Through these pipes, right that are all connecting our brains.

Jordan 56:04  
Right? Okay, so that's a good word. They were nice, good and body like, wow, first person experience. Tough. Like it's actually been live for real. Yep. Alright, so so here's what she gets it wrong, and where we can actually start to move it in the direction of getting it right. She then goes on to say, Okay, so we're not like the old war, here's the new war. And okay, FBI and CIA and NSA and Facebook and Google, get your shit together, like start figuring out how to fight the new war. And my responses. Those are the wrong kinds of tools. Those are instruments, the NSA, the FBI, Google Facebook that were designed to fight the last war, right. They're kind of collective intelligence. They can't make sense fast enough. They can't make sense, clearly enough to respond to accelerating change. It can't happen they they aren't able to respond to a pace of change. To a war that is moving this fast, like this isn't a war anymore about bringing force to bear. This is a war about bringing speed to bear to be able to actually move faster is called a concept and military theory called the ooda. Loop. That's right. This is a war where strategy has become meta strategy, where you have to actually abstract your strategic agency into an increasingly sophisticated capacity to do strategy, not to have a good strategy, but to actually have the meta strategy of always having a better strategy, which is tough to hold.
Right. And the Oda loop is what observe orient decide. Yeah, so it's a mite. Yes. So that that's, that's john Boyd, and good stuff. So if you take john Boyd, and you kind of plug john Boyd into john Boyd, and then you just keep doing that you like do a recursive loop on it, you get to an endpoint. And if you can perceive what I just said and hold it, you're not actually hold onto the thing, the thing that is the answer to the question that you asked. And the thing that is the answer to the question that she was pointing to. But again, that's no joke. But that is not a trivial thing. The notion of what happens when you try to run a recursive process on a loop on ooda loop is the mind. Alright, so I have to know step back, here's, here's what, here's the problem we run into. And we're actually at the end like, this is the end of the story as far as we can go. 
If you happen to be an adult right now, you almost certainly grew up in the context of the blue church. You may have grown up you may be if you're young, young adult, you grew up in the context of the emergent, decentralized environment as you got to explore the internet firsthand. And that's cool. But nonetheless, most of your developmental environment was still in the context of this blue church, which means that you have a mind the way that your mind is set up this the conceptual tools that you have to use the ways that you intrinsically intuitively go about making sense of your environment, the deep underlying assumptions of the nature of reality. were developed in that context and responded to that context. You were a Jaguar in the jungle. Well, unfortunately, that mind is itself not responsive, it is not adaptive to the emergent context. This is not a simple thing. Because, well, if you try to figure out how to build a new mind, you quickly discover that What are you using to do that? While you're using the mind? Oh, I can't build the new mind with the old mind. That is a that's kind of the centerpiece of the whole thing. So this is where by the way I am, so we are now kind of all caught up with me. My personal arc is the awareness of this problem, and then the endeavor to try to find a way to what's called build, you might have to call it discover a new mind. That is intrinsically the kind of mind that is, all these various things we talked about responsive to accelerating change, recursive ooda loop, fill in the blank.

JM 1:00:18  
You don't think that the human mind is adaptive enough to sort of overcome that problem on its own?

Jordan 1:00:24  
Can I do okay at it, but the the late 20th century, Western civilization blue church mind is not right. Now, that's a mind that we were handed but can we discard it and find a new one I've I feel like Personally, I'm able to operate in this on these margins here that we're talking about. And sometimes I attribute it to being Gen X and also like a real early tech adopter as Gen X. So I, I remember being analog and I remember being digital, and I remember sort of evolving. Yeah, I remember them evolving both with me at the same time. Time. And I don't I don't know if that gives me a special leg up and understand. I think d&d helps a lot. DND the notion that when you're a kid, your mind was actually taught firsthand that reality can be simulated. And creating your reality simulator to not mistake reality for reality simulation is actually a really useful, lucky thing to have run into.

JM 1:01:25  
That's funny, my favorite part of Dungeons and Dragons was actually just flipping through the monster manuals, and then just fabricating characters. I didn't want to have to play all those damn games I just wrote down I was level 99 man and I was this and I had that and it was fantasy man.

Jordan 1:01:39  
So think about this in the context of this notion of NPC. It's funny, like we actually have we have the concept Well, if you're a human being like a real live human being, and you're not aware of the fact that you're playing a character most of the time, you're not aware of the fact that your identity was something you fabricated sometime during adolescence to allow you to fit in and be successful in your social million. Then you're an NPC. That's what an NPC really is. If you are aware of that fact, and you can kind of hold that identity somewhat loosely, and step back, or step down or up depending your preferred directionality and drop into another character. So I guess today what I'll do is I'll play a female elf. And then tomorrow I'll be in work and you recognize it, that's the thing you can actually do that. Then what you can do is you can try to step into the place from which that is coming. Yeah. Well, that's it. That's the mind that's the human mind. So not the late 20th century blue church mind. The human mind is the place from which that is coming.
Strike strikes me is that I'm using air quotes here traditional sort of mind frame slash culture slash Moore's and norms may not be best suited to understand this emerging universe or intelligent Network since making whatnot because of that very lack of fluidity that you're discussing. All right, well, so how much more time do we have?

JM 1:03:09  
As much time as you want, sir.

Jordan 1:03:10  
Oh, alright, if you folks are willing to listen, I'm certainly willing to try to speak although I mentioned I've got about 15 minutes before I get tired. Okay. bringing water. Okay, so. So let me actually, since we're both Gen Xers all use old fashioned PC metaphors. Let's double click on that. Let's open the folder. Let's see. All right, so I'm gonna use the word tradition in two different ways. So I'll speak to tradition in I would say kind of a fast sale sense, which is to say like late 90s. Late 90s mind is fucked. Let's just be very clear. There is almost nothing of late 90s mind that is going to be helping us out. But then we'll use tradition in maybe in some some sort of mythical poetic sense. Like The kind of stuff that's been around for 10,000 years.
There's some pretty good stuff there. Things like how to enter into right relationship with your wife. And I don't mean by the way, trying to run it as a script from some artifact, that's not going to be particularly helpful. But the actual tradition, meaning the actual thing that has been passed down lived from generation to generation, which we Gen Xers are sort of barely remember, because the period of disruption of the 60s and 70s really threw a monkey wrench into those kinds of things. But things like keeping your promises and trying to speak honestly, like that kind of stuff. That kind of stuff is traditional under the crucible of cultural evolution, meaning it shows up as being virtuous in most cultures over long periods of time because it actually works. So let's call it the basics. So if we we find ourselves, discarding the artifacts of the nonsense of what late 20th century mind brought up and settling into the most basic basics. And in fact, the more natural it is, the more human it is, the more likely that it will be helpful. Now, this doesn't mean anarchism, right? It doesn't mean sort of, uh, oh, let's go back and wear feathers and pretend like we're, you know, Stone Age tribesmen because that ain't real either. 
That that's the worst case scenario this late 20th century mind simulating something. But if we can actually sort of listen to the stuff that has actually been really handed down, painfully and carefully Because it is the most precious and most meaningful, and allow that kind of thing, the basis of how we go about making our next choices, and very carefully do So recognizing that we are we're sort of walking across the we're in a journey. We're journey from, from from Egypt to us some good old fashioned mythopoetic language. And so we have to take each step carefully. We don't really know where we are, but we do know that we have to take each step carefully. So let's do that. And we can rely to the extent that we can rely on stuff that is the oldest and most share, because, well, that's the best we have. And it's actually pretty darn good to be perfectly honest. Right? Just have to be thoughtful, be careful and be thoughtful. I wanted to finish on that one. I can see your eyes though going, I feel like I'm finished on that one.

JM 1:07:03  
Okay, I wanted to bring into this conversation, this notion of sovereignty that I read of yours. And there's three, and there's three elements to it, if you could lay them out, because my audience is predominantly male, there's a lot of women but predominantly male, and most of them are 24 to 44. And most of them feel as though they lack personal sovereignty. And most of them feel as though they're struggling against the society that wants to strip their sovereignty from them. And also feels as though that they're in a circumstance in which they're detached from these 10,000 year old traditional ideas that actually work. And they're floating in a sea of this sort of confusion, where they feel sort of violated on a daily basis and your your notions of sovereignty, I thought, really were powerful. 
And I want to when you have to explain them, I'm going to punctuate that relative to my audience, so I thought it was great. So if you could please explain that we can wrap up off of that. Okay, so when you're referring to the three things you referring to perception. Yes. making a choice making. Yep. Okay. Alright, so what I'm going to do is I'm going to do that one added I want to do three other that are bleak, like they're like the cross like this. And that gives you actually a deeply to have a nice sphere. So this three goes this way, the other three goes this way. I apologize, I just said seems absolutely absurd. Remember, I covered in the beginning that I'm an unusual kind of dude, plus a plus Jordan and I can see each other on video, but we're not recording it. So even better. So an audio it sounds like a circle.

Jordan 1:08:48  
Okay. So, to begin with sovereignty, we have just this very simple notion that we were kind of discussing the very beginning we have perception, we have sense making and then we have choice making. So in perception, we have The capacity to perceive what is happening to us in the world. And we can notice that there's, this can be very little, and it can be a lot, you know. So there's a simple expression, you can close your eyes, so your perception just became less, and you can open your eyes, your perception became more. And if you say, for example, have learned how to I don't know surf or to play baseball or basketball or walk in the woods, you will notice that as you have learned how to be in these environments, what you see changes, you can see more, right? So that's the idea of perception that there's a lot of practice involved in expanding your perception. And in the context of sovereignty, a big piece of it is actually being able to expand your perception and what I'm gonna call symmetry. And what that means is that for example, having too much vision and not enough sound or hearing creates a bias that creates a kind of like a saber toothed Tiger or a saber toothed Tigers something is leaning too heavy in the direction of long teeth. And so it's very fragile to changes. 
Whereas a human like a homo sapiens is actually kind of well poised and balanced and can kind of go in different directions and big metaphor and sovereignty is that, well, for your audience, it's the middle linebacker, right, the ball is snapped, just drop your hips, chop your knees, put your head on a swivel so that you can respond to what's happening. And that basic sense of symmetry, this sense of balance is crucial across all these dimensions. So in the context, context of perception, it means things like really being able to unlock all these wide varieties of perception that are available, learning how to listen to your entire emotional manifold and allow anger to arise. And actually notice what your anger is actually telling you because it's telling you something, telling you something that some part of you feels like you need to fight. That's what it is, right? Anger is fight and fear is fleet. Okay, what is your fear telling you and actually listen to it. Don't avoid it. Don't repress it. Find out what it's trying to tell you. And allow that wisdom to percolate through you. And then, as you can expand your perceptive capacities and all kinds of directions and really learn how to perceive nuance, and subtlety well, and make your perception broad, diverse, and subtle, you are increasing your capacity for sovereignty. 
So then we move into your sense making. And here we run into the problem that only a small fraction of what you're perceiving is going to be able to be something you can make sense up. So here, a lot of what we were actually talking about, instead of the latter, two thirds of the conversation shows up, if you are wedded unconsciously, to a given framework or to a given identity. If you respond with knowing meaning that you are an NPC, you're running a script. You have a bunch of stuff that you very quickly use To identify what is really happening, what you're perceiving you for close inquiry and inquisitiveness and curiosity in exchange for knowing quickly. 
Then you're trading short term narrow effectiveness for sovereignty. And again, you're becoming a saber toothed tiger. If you happen to be in the Oxford debating club, this might actually be effective or you can say a pithy thing, and you can get the the other boys to laugh. But you will find yourself actually not being able to be in relationship with what's really happening. You will not notice the important stuff because your Knower is trying to fit perception into its preconceived frameworks, rather than actually perceiving perception, perceiving reality and allowing itself to shift and change or unlock a particular tool kit and dropping a new toolkit. So here's where practices like mindfulness and meditation and And slowing down. And playing Dungeons and Dragons are very helpful because they allow you to actually just have what I call liminal mind, a way of being in relationship to curiosity and to inquiry first, and then bringing toolkits to bear second. So then you have choice making, which is combining both selecting that set of actions that seemed to make the most sense from those actions that you are in fact most skillful of engaging it. So here I mean, in choice, I mean, both the kind of the conscious notion of choosing, but also the embodiment of doing so it's both choice making is is is an embodied thing in the world. So I have.
I chose right when I chose to be on this podcast. It wasn't just something that's happening in my mind. It was already showing up as a determination that I would secure the time and space to be present here. Not elsewhere. So when I say choice, I mean, choice and commitment are the same word. Millennials I'm talking to you. We actually is really referred to you think of you guys as being flaky because for some reason you have this weird habit of not doing what you say you're going to do. I don't know why, but you do. So choice then is this very interesting dialogue between the dispositional potential of what you could do in the world, your skillfulness in the world, and your sense of what's happening. Right and so to make a good choice to make the most effective choice, is the last part of sovereignty and this of course, involves the discipline of again, allowing your liminal mind to come into fluidly as the phrase slow is smooth, smooth is fast. Like allowing the Time necessary for the right choice to actually emerge. And then taking the care to build skillfulness. So that you can actually deliver on that choice all the way through to the end with the least amount of unintended consequences. And with the least amount of effort should be effortless. You can think about the difference between say a, let's try Bruce Lee is a good example. If you watch Bruce Lee, he brings an enormous amount of force with new excess motion. So become Bruce Lee is the last that is sovereign in the context of at least come true. And actually he was sovereign in a lot of context. 
So that we can say is right, you distinguish three pieces all now are connected to each other. They're all part of the same thing. And so we have to be very thoughtful about the fact that it's the whole and integrated with each other if you over by us in any one of these three directions. Now once again to come to separate us Tiger you have to be able to actually stay up. And then we can be aware of the fact that all of these are contextual. So I've mentioned, for example, that Bruce Lee was sovereign in the context of Kung Fu. He probably wasn't sovereign in the context of surfing. But I imagine it wouldn't have taken him too long as you have to be aware now meta aware of where you are, and then aware of where your shows are, how you're showing up. So I might, for example, be sovereign, I'm walking down the street. And my ability to respond to what is happening is allowing me to make effective choices, but which I mean, merely, I can make choices whereby I am at least as well off in the next moment in my ability to make good choices as I am now. And ideally better. That's literally an effective choices, nothing but that just means that every choice I'm making is making my sovereignty better, at least a little bit. So I'm doing that I'm doing well. I am observing. I'm learning from my advice. vironment, I'm walking and everything's working out fine. 
And then gunshots breakout. Let's say I've never experienced that in my life. Well, I'm probably not sovereign to that environment you can imagine like this sphere of sovereignty either collapses or you can imagine that there's like a dot inside my sphere and suddenly the moves shot way out and it's outside of my sphere sovereignty. Well, at a meta sovereign level, there's a an ability to be aware of where you are now, I am not sovereign right now. What do I do? Now get back to middle linebacker. Well, you better drop into liminality you better drop into doing the best you can to open up, not think you know what's going on, and listening and poising yourself in balance, to be able to do the best you can to respond to what's happening, which may, by the way mean doing what surfers do what a huge fucking way that just crushed you, which is to completely relax you if you're an absolute chaos, you can't possibly be soldered to that context. That's almost the definition of chaos. And so the way to respond to absolute chaos is to actually go into a completely liminal state and just not even try to make choices until something has begun to show up that gives you some orientation. So that's one part of the story. So then then I go to the other part of the story. This is sovereignty and by the way, at this point, I'm afraid we're gonna have to stop because I'm actually losing my sovereignty I'm getting tired.
So history other dimensions, integrity, discernment, and embodiment. So integrity is bringing all aspects of yourself into right relationship with each other. If you're a man in the ages of 20 to 108 for actual disco with shortly after birth. And by the way, also woman was talking about right now. This is not Easy, right? This notion of Okay, well, how do I become aware of all the different aspects of myself? And how do I bring them into right relationship with each other? That's a lot. That's a whole lot. And it's the whole life's journey, by the way, it never ends. So the question of sovereignty is actually almost a question of choice. are you choosing to go in that direction are you choosing to decide that you're going to take complete responsibility for how you're showing up in the world, recognizing that quite often you will not be adequate to what's happening, but you're going to take that you're just going to step into it and you're going to always try to dust your ass off and get up and do better next time. 
And with love, this is the thing that men have a hard time with, that bringing all the aspects of yourself into right relationship actually requires that you oftentimes allow those aspects to be held with care not with harshness. Men be ourselves up a lot. So you made a mistake. How do you not beat yourself up? Because that's just an ineffective way of learning. It just shuts down learning. It's not a good way to learn. How do you actually say okay? Wasn't the way I have learned to show up? How do I do better next time? I just better just imagine if you were trying to be a really good dad, to a young son, like a four year old son. That's the idea. So come into relationship with yourself from that perspective. And slowly but surely learn how to really allow all the different aspects of yourself to come into relationship right relationship with each other integrity. Okay, second, discernment. discernment is kind of like tuning your instrument. If we say that yourself all the aspects of yourself are your instrument, how do you allow now how do you learn how to listen to all those aspects? How do you attune to how you yourself as a as a singular kind of being are able Two sense what's going on in the world.
And this involves a lot of doing a lot of practice. Like it's very much okay let's go into the world. Let's do stuff. Let's surf. Let's talk to women, let's say challenging things to our co workers and boss. And then notice what's happening. What felt what ended up being a good choice with nothing a bad choice with a curiosity and a gentleness but also instead that fastest and a perseverance. Which by the way, is just called learned. And recognized, by the way that as you do that, and as you recognize that you have, there's always more options than you think you have. There's always a bigger context and you're aware of, and every other human being in the history of ever is just as fucked up and limited as you are. So, okay, might as well just start with where you are and start going. You can begin the process of discernment and really learning how to listen to the instrument that you are And you have me a lot of physical metaphors. We're shooting a bow or gun, a rifle, shooting a basketball.
If you like other metaphors skateboarding or dancing, these are all places that many men can be familiar with that notion like learning how to shoot a basketball, you remember that when you're a kid. It takes a certain way of listening to something that you have no idea. And then you just try and then you listen to you try and you listen, you try and you listen. And suddenly you start to get the hang of it. Well, just imagine extending that out to all of reality. And you're in the process, you're in the process of discernment. And then, the third is, embodiment. The third aspect of sovereignty what I mean by embodiment is very much to distinguish knowing from mastery. So When I grew up in Texas, and I remember actually in college, being interested in learning how to play roller hockey. So what did I do? I went to the library and checked out a book by the sort of like the Soviet, the guy who invented the Soviet hockey system. I read how to play hockey. Well, as you might imagine, that's not particularly useful. There's a pretty obvious distinction between book learning and embodiment when it comes to things that are very much of the body sports. But what I would like to suggest is that that same distinction is true in all things. Mathematicians and physicists are kind of aware of this, that if you were to ask say Einstein, where the process of his insight comes from, he may very well like point to parts of his physical body, like yes, my elbow was the back of my neck. 
He's really allowing the mastery of the math and the physics to sink in until it is intuitive until it is fluid until it is natural. And he's acting from naturalness, and being aware of the difference, like being aware of where you are skateboarding. No, well, almost all adult males will find themselves being very stupid when their skateboard. And they, they, for some reason don't recognize they have no idea that it's hard and so they hurt themselves. But it might be wise to consider the fact that you don't know how first and then allow yourself to learn the process of just fluidly and slowly, taking the time to allow your discernment in this context to build until the process of being a skateboarder has become embodied, and doing no more that is in fact precisely it might be called your evolutionary edge. Okay, I can stand an escape board and I can write it down a hill and I can turn I can stop. Awesome. Now I might try to learn how to ollie up before after, and that's the idea right? And I'm keeping it really simple, but it's it is actually that simple. You know, Jordan Peterson says, clean your room. I'm saying the same thing. And by the way, if you want to learn how to start sovereignty, start with yourself. Then start with your the people who you love the most. Right? If you can get past that, give me a call. Right?

JM 1:25:16  
Well, that that is an excellent description of a lot of the things that I've been driving out over the last couple of years. And I brought this up, because of the way that I think men are feeling sort of confused by all the misdirection and misinformation that's out there. Also feeling attacked as the American you know, the APA just comes out and actually pathologize is traditional roles of masculinity. And I think that we're all sort of grasping for a sense of, what is it mean to be, you know, a positively masculine male in the culture today and, and when I started reading about your sense of sovereignty, and especially now when you add integrity, discernment and body meant to it and I realized these are applicable to women as well, but really, I don't know that I've come across a better summation of 21st century positive masculinity and how guys can can take these sort of all I mean, man, there's a lot in each of these elements here, but then begin to apply them in their own lives and use them to work their way through this information battlefield that's out there and the disinformation and the ongoing sort of information warfare that's out there the traditional masculinity, the attack on on sense making information and all this confusion that we have and yeah, I have always advocated for guys to start with yourself first, you put yourself first and you take care of your family. And maybe you can take care of your community and then maybe your city and then maybe your nation and maybe the world but you know, first start with yourself.
It can I just kind of trauma with it. Yeah, just say something. Something really showed up. So I wrote an essay, because I was really, really curious about the question of courage. And I was trying to really contemplate it and I don't know if I did a particular Good job, but something showed up for me that were useful. The courage to storm Normandy beach is real for sure that obviously, none of us have anything vaguely like that. Nothing. The courage, the courage is what we're talking about. It's a different kinds of courage, right? People aren't firing bullets at us. So we don't get to watch our best friends head explode.

Jordan 1:27:27  
Different different things. So it's a different kind of courage. But it's still courage as the ability to stand in front of the slings and arrows of the, you know, the AMA pathologizing. masculinity is what I call infinitesimal courage. It's a courage that actually requires that you be able to stand and not and feel it. It hurts, right? If there's pain there, for sure. And it's not just pain. It's hard. It's real threat. Yes, but you can't respond in the same way. You can't shoot back. And so what was coming up for me as you're talking about it is that 2000 years ago, this is going to come very odd coming from me because my background is vaguely religious. But 2000 years ago, we were given an opportunity on occasion to be more Christ like I would say right now that that is in fact mandatory. It is no longer a matter of that might be a neat thing to do for a few folks. The kind of sovereignty we're talking about the kind of courage we're talking about, is precisely the kind of courage that Christ represents.

JM 1:28:40  
That is an amazing point that you brought up and something I could probably talk for hours about, but we'll put it as they say a pin in that one. And and on the last note that I just I want to touch is that we didn't really get too much into the red red resistance or the red religion or as you very aptly, and just Rob also described and I put in my book, how the blue church and the ideas that they've spread have created a situation in which the only people left to resist it are those who are actually now immune to the tactics of the blue church. And so when people ask me, What can we do? My my point to them, as always start with yourself, what we have to do is actually build real communities. And it starts with individuals. And it starts with having an inner strength, and it starts with a little strength. And it starts with this, just the notion of sovereignty, and then expanding it as you can turn around to the people that you love and the people that you now elect to commune with. And to me that is the answer to sort of combating what's happening. And again, there's so many topics we could have covered and I'll just in very, two seconds touch on you were you mentioned in social media, making weak affiliations versus strong connections and Social Media presents us with opportunity to replace our strong connections with these weak affiliations. 
And so while I will commend my guys in the community that I work in, and that we specifically create real time real life events where we commune together in person, we see each other, we look each other in the eyes, we give each other hugs. And we like actually get to know the other person and make and use social media to create strong actual real world bonds to transmit many of these messages that we're discussing here. And so to my guys out there, you know, after we listened to this, this podcast over and over again, because there's so much rich information in here, just remember that that community, in person and in real time and creating the communities, actual physical communities with strong bonds, rather than relying on the weak affiliations of social media is the way that we're going to move forward positively into the future. Jordan, I could literally talk to you for six or eight hours. It was a real honor and a pleasure to have you on. I honestly I'm fanboying a little bit I cited so much and like the peak chapter in my book that this has been intellectually really rewarding for me. And thank you so much for taking the time. Really, you know, I just emailed you out of the blue and you agreed to do it, I couldn't believe it. So thank you. Thank you so much. And, you know, we're definitely me and my listeners are gonna listen to this one a few times. There's tons of information, I would love to do it again, I'm sure I'll have more of a succinct direction to go in the future if we can talk again. So really, thank you. Congratulations on the new addition to the family. And, you know, really, thanks for coming on. I really appreciate it.

Jordan 1:31:31  
Wonderful. I enjoyed learning about what you're up to. And I've appreciated the the last bit of what you said there, so I could not agree more that you guys are focusing the right area. And yeah, I do truly hope that those folks who decided to listen for last 90 minutes have found the time well spent.

JM 1:31:51  
I'm sure they certainly will. Thank you very much. I'll let you get on with everything. And I hope that we can touch base again and do this again sometime soon. Yeah, sounds nice. Right? Thank you, Jordan.