Daniel 0:03  
Collective insights as a voyage through topics and technologies revolutionizing human wellbeing, groundbreaking approaches for a better world and a better life away you Welcome to collective insights very first episode of the neuro hacker collective podcast. We wanted to start a podcast or we can have these video dialogues because we have such interesting and brilliant people in our network, who have various expertise in areas of neuroscience, cognitive enhancement, psychological development, etc. So this is the first of these dialogues. My name is Daniel Schmactenberger. I'm heading up research and development here and this is my first time to be on this side of a podcast, so forgive my clumsiness with it. And we are very excited to have the first conversation be with Dr. Zachary Stein. sack is a very good friend and really brilliant an innovative thinker. He is a philosopher of education with a background and meta theory, integral theory and developmental psychology. psychometrics did his work in education and psychometrics at Harvard with Howard Gardner, and the whole multiple lines of intelligence advancing what we think of as intelligence world, work with Kirk Fisher on advanced developmental psychology and then integral philosophy on them, and has written books on the topic which we might get into a bit. And our topic today is understanding what intelligence is, what IQ is, and EQ and other kind of metrics related to intelligence where they're good, where they're not adequate. What we're actually talking about when we talk about intelligence, what's actually meaningful here, what are better ways of defining it and assessing it? And then how much of it is fixed, how much is changeable? And what are the what do we know about how to actually advance and develop what is actually worth developing here. So this is a topic that I don't know anyone who knows more about the the depth of the philosophy of them. Zach, amongst other things, was the founder of a really fascinating organization called electical. re co founder there, which is a method for advanced psychometric development across lots of lines, looking at someone's development in different aspects of cognition, their development and ethics and their epistemology and their moral reasoning and how do we assess those things? How does the assessment affect the nature of what we're assessing? All like that? So Zach, thank you for being here today with us.

Zack 2:37  
I'm so excited, Daniel. There's like no conversation I'd rather be. So this is wonderful. So, intelligence, let's just dive right in. I think there are probably no scores that people have identified with as being important metrics of their capacity than IQ. Maybe So I'm curious for you to just start with the education of us. How did the IQ develop? How did that score come about? What does it actually measure? How does that relate to the total picture of what intelligence is? What are multiple lines of intelligence? And how should we think about intelligence? I think everyone has a kind of intuitive sense that of something that relates to processing speed and memory and computational power. That is kind of in distinction to artistic inclination or interpersonal inclination. So start us off dive in, how should we think about intelligence? What are the problems that we think about it?

Unknown Speaker  3:44  
Yeah. So it's interesting, you start with the notion of score, because that's really one of the hearts of the issues here is that we have connected intelligence which is something that goes on in the mind with a particular instrument, right that's been used to detect Intelligence. So kaulder supposedly detect intelligence for a very long time. So I think one of the things we need to think about is the IQ test, and disentangling that a little bit from our conceptions of intelligence, because we've ratified and simplified and I think drastically over simplified it. And there's many great histories of IQ testing. I really liked Stephen Jay Gould, great work called the Miss measure of man. And you see from reading this book, that the IQ test was not an instrument of science, but an instrument of bureaucracy and had to do with the quantitative, excuse me, the socio political history of quantitative objectivity. Right. So this has to do with the use of numbers in the manipulation of people. And this is a very important aspect of modernity, and it was hugely liberating and things like public health, and census taking and other areas where mathematics liberated us into this new realm of social engineering. But of course, every step forward is a there's a dialectic to these kinds of developments. And so, what you find with the IQ test is that in France, turn of the century, you know, late 1800s, B'nai was tasked by the French government to create a test that could be used to basically keep certain types of kids out of schools and given a special attention. So B'nai was someone who specialized in a whole bunch of psychological fields, but especially the rehabilitation of the learning disabled. So the IQ test was really just a very gross sorting mechanism created in France, to find those kids who needed special attention. And B'nai was very explicit and Stephen Jay Gould gives us beautiful account of bearnaise dismay and concern at the ratification of IQ. He thought this was just an instrument just to us to sort kids in useful way, in the public interest. It's not in any way a theory by the nature of the mind, or by the nature of intelligence, that whole idea that the IQ test measures, this intelligent kind of general intelligence, which is then genetically transmitted. That whole idea came from the Americans who imported the IQ test at the beginning of the First World War. And at the same time, created the multiple choice test. And boom, we got kind of large scale industrial strength standardized testing, and that's a gift of the kind of world war one kind of scramble. The preamble to World War One scramble at America. And so what was first just an instrument used to sort children to give them special attention with no psychological theory accompanied, right get that it was a theoretical became an instrument that was standardized that was used to store adults and children and That came loaded with theoretical baggage about a general intelligence and about its genetic heritability. And so there's a long legacy legacy, which of course, Google lays out of how this got tied into the eugenics movement. I'm not going to get into that, because I think it's a distraction. The key that I want to point out here is that IQ as we think about it, right, has saturated the culture. But it's not as theorized as it needs to be, right. It's a my couple of a mongrel concept, right, which is the same concept that kind of supervenes on the actual realities of the mind. It's touching some things it's a it's what Roy bass guard, the great meta theorists, the great philosopher, you know, the late great, he called it a Demi reality, which is to say, as many it's like it's getting at something real, but it's a small version of what's real. This is the IQ. So I like to compare it to the GDP as a number right the gross domestic product massively Complex national economy. But again in the scramble of a war effort to synthesize and to organize, give it one number and put it on a linear trajectory and use it to rank countries unilaterally and make it a single most valuable thing. easy thing to do with it with a number, but a clear over simplification. So likewise, you know, it's not that you're not getting it something, you're getting something. Right, but it's a Demi reality. It's a small rate. So the IQ test became this. And it truncated our thinking about the nature of intelligence, and it became hypertrophied. And a lot of people don't realize that the IQ test was then prettied up and complicated, a little bit taken by the Educational Testing Service and made into the the si t.

Unknown Speaker  8:44  
And so there's this long kind of continuous history of the use of these forms of intelligence testing. Not really for scientific research about intelligence, but for the organization of educational systems and large scale bureaucracies, like the Army, which was where the first large scale standardized test was ever created was for the army alpha one and alpha two, which were just sort the incoming millions into the American army for the World War One. So that's kind of the brief history of where this instrument came from. And so I'm not a big fan of the instrument itself. Now there's been improvements to have these newfangled ones the raven nature, Susan's problems have been solved with objectivity and reliability, which were the first big concern. So I'm gonna kind of skip that side piece. But I want to talk about is the way that we've got kind of addicted to a simplistic way of thinking about intelligence, right. And actually, many people have an allergy to thinking about it in the more complex way. And, you know, Howard Gardner, Kurt Fisher, who I studied with at Harvard, all they wanted to do is talk about it in a more complex way. And they have very little interest in anything like general intelligence and thought it was actually a concept that was dangerous, right? high regard once said to me know that intelligence is the most political of all the psychological concepts, right? Because it becomes the meritocracies kind of yardstick. And so yeah, so that's a little bit of a preamble to like, okay, let's liberate thinking about intelligence from the IQ and started thinking on intelligence in a more complex way, when you say that the concept has been very reified. Obviously, it has right even though it started out without a really clear, philosophical foundation. But let's take groups like Mensa, right, let's take the way it's been used in military or any other kind of institution, not just for rooting out who is not qualified, but also who is qualified for higher level capacities. You would think that if it didn't map in some way to reality, the concept wouldn't have withstood this much time. So what is it measuring? And how does that correlate to reality and then also, what is it not measuring? I would love to Go in there a little bit.

Unknown Speaker  11:01  
Yeah, absolutely. And like I said, it is measuring something, just like just like GDP is measuring something. So it's not that it's out of touch with reality. It's that it's revealing unreality in a way that's not revealing as much as we could. So it's drastically oversimplifying. It's kind of like taking a complex ecosystem, and giving it a single number, when in fact, there are many things happening in the ecosystem, which could be given different numbers. And so in some institutional context, that's very valuable. And first, when you're, for example, starting a huge army from scratch with a bunch of American farm boys, and you want to figure out like, who could potentially be a general, like it's a very useful than a gross way to sort that. And so this is important. When you start thinking about what then what does it measure?

Unknown Speaker  11:48  
Yeah. Does it map to being in general well, right. And that's what I'm saying. I'm not sure.

Unknown Speaker  11:55  
This is a question then we have to go deeper and think what will then what's the nature of the mind because what does it Measure means well, what's there to measure? Yeah. And so that's where we need to tell a story about cognitive development, and about the nature of the mind and how it grows and what the nature of learning is, and what the nature of what we call intelligence actually is busting the damaged reality to get to the actual reality of intelligence. So my favorite phrase of Piaget is the idea that intelligence is the grasp of consciousness, right? Which is to say it's intelligence is consciousness, operating world, right? And so, when we look at what intelligence is, what has to do is it's these kind of skillful manipulation or operation, first on the physical then on representations and on abstraction than on principles and actions, right. Which is to say that it's one thing to move physical objects around in a skillful way, which humans have done since. Who knows how long millions of years right, but now we're moving Being around principles and axioms of science in a skillful way. So we're looking at a spectrum of cognitive complexity that grows over time. And, you know, the PHA that was kind of chastised in your introduction to the psychology course, that is not the actual PhD. And Kurt Fisher, I think, is probably one of the most important psychologists of the 20th century, in part because he kept the PG idea and vision of this hierarchical cognitive architecture that emerges over time. So what we look at at IQ is, in many ways, a generalized, if you want to go their capacity for building skills up this hierarchy. Right. Now, what we're missing with a typical way of kind of capturing some of those skills and saying those are valuable and those are intelligence is that there's a very wide array of skills like huge number of skills that you can build, and only some of those map with what we measure on IQ. So there are many people who are radically skilled at building really quickly Skills up this hierarchy of skill. 
They're just not this kind of stuff that we measure value on IQ tests. So that's kind of the one of the ways to slice this pie is to say that multiple lines of intelligence model precisely multiple lines of intelligence. And so if there's anything like a generalized intelligence, it has to do with your basic capacity to build in any intelligence. Right. And so some people are gifted at building in mathematical intelligences, which is to say they can move up and down this hierarchy of complexity and an abstraction they can do that in math really well. That's measured on IQ death, right? Other people can move up and down this abstraction and complexity and let's say music or dance, right. And there are hierarchies of abstraction and dance. If you've seen a skilled dancer, what you have is someone who's supervening on a lot of possible moves and building this trajectory towards an aesthetic experience. That's a very abstract thing to do. Very complex. skill development, not going to get that an IQ test, also not valued in the army that, you know, in the places where IQ tests, find the people who do the work, right. And the predictive validity, I think is sketchy too. So I think we One of the myths we need to bust is that these people who do great on IQ tests actually do great in the world like this, as we look into that, just like the si t and the gra, have very minimal predictive validity, minimal. There are studies that show the gra to be negatively predictive of graduate school success, which is to say you do good on the Jeremy, you actually do bad at writing a dissertation. It's interesting, right? Like I did terrible on these kinds of tests. I'm dyslexic, so it's a little personal. I did pretty good at writing a dissertation. And so I think there's this complicated kind of cluster of things that make us look at particular types of skill development in particular capacities in particular lines. That's what we value that's intelligence. We need to think more broadly and in the kind of guy contextually and globally. You know, I think it was Hunter S. Thompson, who said when the going gets weird, the weird turn pro, right. And this is the situation where so we need to start looking at these much different forms of intelligence, but still thinking about growing, right. And so it becomes less about one form of intelligence and more about many, and the functional fit and the unique profile of the individual.

Unknown Speaker  16:26  
It's a worthwhile concept amongst the multiple lines of intelligence, two separate ones that seem more generally abstract from more embodied. So, and this is just fitting a very rough intuition. I think many people have say, you take the mathematical line of development, and you take linguistic and then maybe you take some orientation towards the physical sciences, right? And you cluster those things. And you say computers could get fairly good at that without symbol grounding problem issues, right without sensorial grounding, but dance and maybe certain kinds of interpersonal naturalistic and maybe even numinous or spiritual intelligences kind of cluster differently? Maybe we say they shouldn't we shouldn't cluster them at all. They're a totally different things. But is there a clustering like that that makes any sense? And then it is there something that we can think of as general intelligence within the more cognitive domains that is accessible?

Unknown Speaker  17:21  
Yeah, I mean, it's a great question. And this was one of the questions that drove the yoga dance because the new PhD audience got to the point where they said, okay, we know there are still these levels, but it's not like one big jump up. And yeah, many little jumps in many different areas, like a, like a growing tree, many branches, like the Darwinian metaphor, but it's skill development. But they said, you know, that, like you said, intuitively, there's clusters. You know, if you're good at physics and math, doesn't mean you're going to be good at dance. Yeah. But if you're good in physics at math, you probably will be good at biology. So this is kind of near and far transfer problem. And that led to the issue of possible basic structures under And kind of deeper branches in this trees of development. And so Robbie case who's another great newbie as yet, in the University of Toronto, close Fisher colleague, they did some of the first dynamic systems modeling of these things. And they found some of these deep structures. It's interesting mathematical psychology. But what they showed Robin case, and particularly was that there was something like a deep structure to the mathematical domain. And it was the number line. And he had this incredibly simple study, where he showed if you introduce inner city kids to the number line before any other mathematics, which by the way they don't get because they don't have like calendars hanging on the wall and their parents like I'm talking about linear things. I'm not playing Chutes and Ladders like in a calm environment stuff, but you show them this number line. 
They're doing as well in first grade as any of these kids from the suburbs, because they got the basic structure of the mathematical domain, which was in a simplified manner, the number one so there are other similar basic structures, let's say with perspective taking at social Alright, so Robin k stuff, there's probably one for kind of mathematics, spatial, temporal. And there was probably long for interpersonal. And I think there's also one for interpersonal, which is to say, your relation to yourself. So if I were to cluster the lines of a clash of them around the classic big three, which would be the AI that we hit. And so I do think typically what we think of as intelligence is really facility with skill development in the domain of objective mathematical, spatial, temporal realities, the kind of stuff that you push around in space and time. But there are other domains, there's a whole cluster of domains of social ethical, but when you which has to do with abstraction for a minute, so Rubik's cube is moving around spatial, temporal, temporal, physical things, but then as you move up into actual axioms, but axioms about say physics, right, so you're, you're now into a degree of abstraction that requires not relating with just sensorial reality. But that requires mapping to sense where a reality in a different way, then intra or interpersonal domains, so precisely, that maps all the way up in abstract.

Unknown Speaker  20:10  
That kind. Exactly. So imagine three brand, the tree comes up, three branches go out, each of those branches go all the way up to the axioms. And so this the the spatial, temporal, logical mathematical one starts with the kids learning gravity and the ball bouncing and all the things you do in the spatial temporal world that Piaget investigated, he mostly investigated that lie investigated the emergence of things like the idea of causality. Right, there's a time before kids understand causality, right? And they come to understand causality cause and effect. Then you get hypothetical deductive reasoning, which is still higher, more abstract in that domain, but whole other things happen and that other branch of the socio, you know, moral and ethical and similarly with the intro, but they're all related, as well and the branches intertangled higher levels. So this is the view. Again, the IQ test what we think of is over there, sorry, we look at the objective branch, right mathematics, sciences, etc. How well does IQ map to actual proclivity there? So say you have someone that solves Rubik's Cubes very quickly, will they actually be more likely to have novel developments in physics as a as a scientist? Or might they just be great at puzzles that are already defined but not creative intelligence within that domain? I've heard some stories of like Niels Bohr being a very slow thinker, but having a slow process that lead to profound originality. So let's talk about even within the realm of reasoning about objective reality, different kinds of intelligence patterns.

Unknown Speaker  21:52  
Yeah, no, and this is one of the big questions in intelligence research, even those who transcended the IQ concept like Sternberg and gardener there was discussion of Okay, IQ does seem to predict something in some areas. But what's interesting, Howard wrote a book called creative minds. And basically, this book is about this question. And it turns out that many scientists like Einstein, for example, you know, Einstein's reading Spinoza, and playing violin, like in a little philosophical reading group, as a patent clerk before relativity, you know what I mean? And then you look at other scientists who have far transfer away from the scientific domain, typically just some other area, which then gives inspiration back to the scientific domain. And this is, you know, one of the things we're seeing Galactica too, is that the broader your base, right? The healthier any of those branches become more easy to transfer is. So you do in a sense, can predict in a simple way, this guy's gonna be able to do those equations, right? He's got this simple kind of kind of horsepower in the cognitive kind of domain to do the equations but is it going to be the innovative Who came up with totally new equations? Right or realize that those equations aren't the equations we should be doing? So that's different than intelligence. Right? So creative problem finding is different than even creative problem solving, let alone problem solving is not creative. That's routine, which required a lot of intelligence, right, which is a whole class of problems that are very difficult, but routine. And then there are problems people don't even know yet. And so then again, there's a space of unexplored of higher human potentials and forms of creativity. And I think our schooling hasn't let us see what happens when you take some of this super high mathematical IQ and teach them to meditate.

Unknown Speaker  23:43  
You just defined a number of important concepts, but before we lose them, there's some cross training that you mentioned, which is important, but specifically you defined problem solving and problem finding is fundamentally different kinds of things. And it seems seems to me like problem solving within an already exist. problem domain kind of maps to hill climbing, right? And problem finding maps to Valley crossing from kind of evolutionary biology perspective which Eric Weinstein says the first one is what we call excellent. The second is remarkable, remarkable figures out new shit excellent does a good job at predefined stuff. So Rubik's cube is obviously problem solving, right? figuring out new things that we that were in the Unknown, Unknown requires a different kind of exploration. How do you assess each of those differentially?

Unknown Speaker  24:31  
And again, the assessment question, Is this tough? I mean, that's the million dollar question. And I literally because of the political economy, the testing industry, but if you can find a way to measure that creativity, if you can, you know, and the valley crossing hill climbing metaphor is, I think that's the kind of thing we're talking about here. We're talking about those forms of creativity that break into new realms. And you know, I think What to say about assessing the honest answers. I don't know how to assess it. I think what we know how to assess as what we know how to assess, which is people, you know, working with the note, and his IQ map more to help cross to help planning and deli crossing.

Unknown Speaker  25:16  
Definitely, definitely. Now, I think the reason why that's not true sometimes is because as I said, if you take someone who's got that, and throw in an extra spice of something, that they may not even be in their environment, because precisely they're the high IQ guy who gets kept away from those things, right? They're the IQ guy who does just do math and blah, blah, blah. Send them to the zendo. No, I mean, get him doing training is under.

Unknown Speaker  25:44  
Yeah, exactly. And so. So yeah. So I think that's one of the lessons here is that the IQ tests can make can make it seem like that's it, when in fact, that's the coping basic ingredients. We're in one of the areas and you need to bring more to. And that's just, I think, part of the part of the picture, you know, skill development, the way Fisher thought about it had a very intuitive way of thinking about growth, and not just static, unchangeable capacity, but growth and emergence of new capacity. And that's the way the mind works. I think that's the other fallacy of the IQ. And the way intelligence is often conceived is that it's either you're smart or not smart. Right, when in fact, everything we know about the mind is that it's changing literally all the time, first of all, so you can be smart in the morning and not smart that late evening or vice versa. But it's also changing over the course of the lifespan drastically. And I already sketched that hierarchy from the sensory motor to the representational to the abstract to the principal, to the axiomatic. And that's a spectrum of hierarchical complexity that takes literally decades to unfold and the right social cultural conditions.

Unknown Speaker  26:59  
Question today So when we think about hyper specialization within a very specific line, and maybe even a specific subset of the line versus some cross training that leads to different kind of generalist capacities. So let's take like, let's take a Bucky fuller polymath type or like a Paul air dish, almost savant extreme specialist type, right? So you get somebody like erudition, math, who develops graph theory in a way that nobody else was even close. But he couldn't tie his shoes or really do anything else functional. He had obviously allocated like something that happened where all the horsepower was allocated away, but in a way that created real novel value, right? Then you see other people where they have novel value development across many fields that are obviously inter informing each other because of lateral thinking and because of abstraction that has been finding generalized principles across domains, what's the difference in what's happening with those people and how much of that is intrinsic versus developed versus reinforced?

Unknown Speaker  27:58  
And it's so hard to tell and that The one lesson about the mind is that I think uniqueness unicity which to say that it's you don't know, you know, it's the the mind is a complex dynamic system. And so the butterfly can fly at one point in childhood and you get a storm in Chicago late in adulthood. And you don't know you can't connect those dots. And so it's interesting, you know, I think, Kurt Fisher, again, I keep bringing him up. He's my beloved, you know, advisor, he always tells the story of these two theoretical physicists, two theoretical physicists and new both hit by cars crossing the street. Right, which is to say again, you know, Einstein notoriously was, you know, you wouldn't catch his paycheck he'd use it as like, a slip in his book, it's a bookmark and then his secretary if I didn't put it in as he would didn't. So there's this whole hypothesis you know, that when you move on this hierarchical representations, abstractions, principles, accents. You know, why would we need to do that on a Savannah like million years ago, like why is that a capacity of the brain? It's a strange thing. And so one thought is that as you move up that you're kind of recycling some of your neuronal material, which is to say that every move and growth is also a loss. Like, or, and every time you grow up, right, you also lose little son. That's one of the reasons child childhood is so kind of bittersweet and and you have these memories that are so interesting because you know, there was something as a child that you no longer have that in some ways was as valuable, but it had to be lost as you grow. And that way of thinking about the mind is way more attractive to me than thinking about well, you are smart kid and I are smart adult now here is what that's what we think about it. But you're also this very complex, growing organism minds like an organism that literally metabolizes its environment. And depending on what it metabolizes, it grows in certain ways or doesn't.

Unknown Speaker  29:58  
So what you're saying I mean, it obviously makes sense that no matter how much muscular development we have the moment we stopped developing those muscles, they start to shrink because they require continuous inputs that can be the same with cognitive or psycho emotional and other tasks. But there's also a zero sum element to what you're saying in terms of total memory bandwidth and complexity of processing. Where if we develop in some areas, it's almost like there has to be neuro plastic restructuring for optimization for those kinds of things at the cost of optimization for other things, which of course, makes perfect sense. And I think is the way we usually think of it. There's a thought that's very interesting to me, which is a nonzero sum, right? A positive sum where one can develop new capacities well, enforcing existing capacities and just have more net capacity, more computational capacity across the spectrum. speak to them.

Unknown Speaker  30:43  
Yeah, absolutely. And this was often called explicitly schematized. Far transfer, right? And so this is just a fancy way of saying like, No, you let's say you're a really smart guy mathematics and you start to learn the piano. Now you start to learn the piano, and you've never played before. Would you have a PhD in something, you're gonna have to be like a little kid for many weeks, many months, maybe years. Now, that can be very frustrating. And you can separate it from everything else, you know, and try to build it as an independent skill. Or you can find a way to interweave this new skill development with your existing high level skill. And Fisher would often talk about bringing a structure, you know, transferring it over and down. And then you kind of get this helix model where you're bringing in everything that you're growing instead of growing things out in separate places, and you see this all the time. So it's like, you'll have a meditation practice, as you leave somewhere when you go to work, right? Or you're, you go to the gym, and then you come home and eat shit. So I think there's this issue of the segmentation. And again, just all these socio cultural reasons for that. So the explicitly schematize far transfer even near transparent is what you're saying. 
It's about bringing kind of coherence to the skill development. So you don't have this fractured, weird profile of skills, but rather skills that are coherently related to one another scene was can be hard to pull off. Because we often have to hypertrophy skills in certain areas, right? seems to me to be what is thematic of all of the polymaths that we study is that they didn't, they didn't actually categorize your segment, the different areas in which they had expertise is fundamentally different. They thought about universal reality as a much more integrated thing. And what they were studying in ecology became a model for how they thought about economics or psychology or biology, right. So they would then go to an abstraction level called complex systems, right or complex causation, whatever. And then they would think about the lateral application of principles, one domain, other domains. So there, there was, of course, no just net memory, because everything actually made sense and cross referenced. That's a learning modality saying, that's a learning modality. schooling is a big deal here. We wouldn't have IQ tests. If we didn't have the factory schools. We wouldn't think about the next disciplines the way we do if we didn't have, you know, the kind of post for a military industrial University complex. I mean, it's very regimented. If you think about the training, for example of the highly specialized engineers and doctors and these people, and so I'm very much a fan of blurring some of these distinctions doesn't doesn't mean lessening expertise. But it means, you know, bringing more to that, and humanizing it always been the call of the philosopher of education, is to bring the humanities into the science departments, if only so they do better science. You know, not that they don't do science, but so they do. They can make the creative like the guy hypothesis brings in, you know, ancient Greek myth.

Unknown Speaker  33:45  
That's profound. When you see, like the da Vinci machine doing surgery better than any surgeon right and that we're entering a domain in which almost every human skill that would require expertise is being Coming automatable better than we do it. But the process to build automation technologies requires not just hill climbing but Valley crossing kinds of intelligence to figure out what those domains are and how to do them. How do you see the need for hyper specialization changing with advanced technology, exponential tech and automation?

Unknown Speaker  34:23  
Yeah, I mean, I think the people at the edges of those fields don't even really think about what the disciplinary boundaries are or ought to be. I think we're in uncharted territory and most of these fields, you know. And that's, that's important to realize, you know, it's part of the broader global transformation is a global transformation in the way knowledge is produced. And it means supervening on the traditional research Academy and blurring those boundaries they have to be systems biology. I mean, there's just you name any field and it's two fields, and the relevant fields two fields, mind brain and education. This was Kurt Fisher found At the mind, brain and education society and I worked on that journal This is a radically transdisciplinarity So I think, you know, we're, it's, it's an interesting period to be someone who has an expertise so I have training and development psychology, but I'm working in all kinds of fields because the traditional kind of model of what the development of psychologists does has changed so radically and that's that's the story for a lot of people. So I think there's a need and people feel it, whether they're supplementing their graduate education with other quote unquote non traditional forms of exposure you know, which are going to leavening that and bringing, yeah, I guess I think going gets weird, the weird turn pro and the weird turning pro as opposed to what was previously right so now our best chess players can be beaten by our best go players can be and we that exponential curve has Even barely started to take off, right? So when it comes to help learning, we're going to build tools that will help climb us. And they're on every hill right in terms of excellence, what it used to mean terms of machines that can outplay violin or whatever. And so then does wait. And yet it is less clear as far as AGI goes, if we will get Valley cross in the same way, at least right now, right? So then the hypothesis that education should be more oriented towards problem finding and problem solving, and then figuring out how to utilize technology for problem solving. You say that's a big part of education. Yeah. I mean, that's one of the process. It's one of the premises of my book that's coming out soon is that artificial intelligence and things like Basic Income guarantees and radical changes in the kind of macro economic structure globally. They're going to make education as we've known a pretty irrelevant and We're gonna have to radically think, you know, rethink a lot of things. And so the thought of problem finding is actually a thought about values. That's what's so interesting about that. And so, again, the basic issue in the philosophy of education is what is a good life? What does it mean to be a good person or to have a good society? And so problem finding is it is along that trajectory of value. And yeah, then that's so again, we're back to the humanities, and we're back to it.

Unknown Speaker  37:34  
Yeah. Good. I mean, resist the temptation to get into ethics and existentialism, and we can get into forecasts about exponential tech and what that means for education and what the future of education should be. Flag. Those are all podcasts I would like to do together, coming back to people who are listening to this. You know, there might be some people who are have children are planning on having children are really interested in their development, obviously, we kind of need to address that as its own thing. But for people who like a lot of people coming to neuro hacker right now, because they're interested in optimizing their own capacity and their capacity roughly matches to their cognitive intelligence capacity, it also has to do with will and driving creativity and a lot of other things. But so for people who are thinking about their own capacity and how they can think about it, how they can support it, how they can enhance it, you obviously said that the way of thinking about intelligence that is roughly valid, and IQ is thinking about the capacity to develop skills more than any particular skill, except of course, the old shitty narrative was that's genetically fixed and then just kind of goes down with age as your brain declines, as opposed to every time you get a skill that becomes now the knowledge there actually becomes a model for learning more stuff. So you can actually an exponential rate of growth where all the skills and all the knowledge you develop become a basis for increased capacity for developing new things. If you do lateral thinking and abstraction and generalization. Well, right. So a question that I have because you you mentioned a number of things you said if you expose the kids from poor backgrounds to the number line that they just might not have been exposed to, they start to do better. If we're thinking about adults who already have they already did their essay tease their IQ test, they have some sense of kind of fixed capacity there and but they'd like to see if it's not fixed if it is developable. One, how much? What do we think about in Nate versus developable in terms of raw capacity? And where there is relevant or not to that story? And then what do we think about best processes for developing what we would roughly called the kind of any of the lines of intelligence and I would say particularly the ones that relate to the it or objective categories.

Unknown Speaker  40:09  
So the first question that's, again, these one of these questions that comes up with the IQ testing, right, which is basically, though, is it? You know, was it a mate or can you change this thing? I think the answer is yes. Right. There's clearly some genetic it's undeniable that if you take a broad swath of the population, given my IQ test, it's going to accurately kind of represent something. And now, many of those people will not change a lot in terms of their any good meta theory about what that is. I saw one study on genetics that looked at people with above 170, IQ, whole genome assessments. And I think what it said was no individual snips made, they had high correlation, but they were patterns combinatorial patterns across the whole genome, probably that do something like you know, Increased gray matter density or something you are there any kind of you know, I think I you know, philosophically the the concept of heritability itself is complicated, right. So technically my answer, I didn't inherit a hands, because heritability has to do with correlations. And and that's under percent correlation. So. So yeah, so I'm not sure that we know enough about genetics yet to really speculate. And so it's hard to know if I inherited my dad's brain or if I inherited my dad's environment. 
But it's clear that you know, there are differences, and there are things that are harder to change and things that are more malleable. And what would another reason we don't know the answer this question is because basic levels of like, like mass, low level one kind of like physical kind of nutrition and safe environments, and these things are not really available for many people on the planet. And so when you get these sweeping studies about IQ differences across let's say race or nationality or these things it's like, can't really make inferences about anything it made or genetic here, because we're looking at, you know, malnourished, and you know, and so the nourishment of the brain isn't just nutrition. It's also the information and semiotic right environment, and a lack of trauma and fear. And, right. And so that's another reason I'm always so hesitant to say what to name because it's until we start to get really optimal basic conditions for people. It's really hard to, it's really hard to say, what was in their genes and what was became epigenetic from from the womb. So I think we're looking at kind of nature via nurture, as opposed to nature versus nurture. And when it comes to changing intelligence and intelligence, there's, there's so much, you know, exercise and nutrition. Number one. Focus, you know, a lot of what an IQ test gets at is just your ability to sit still and focus like when they are with the first kind of 1917. Army alphas, I mean, what they were really getting at was can this farm boys sit at a desk and take this test for 20 minutes, that was really the main to my mind what they really captured. So things that allow you get to focus and give attention are very important. So meditation is classic, but even just the concerted effort to control your own information online, focus on one thing at a time, which our culture is hard to do. So I put that under nutrition, because that's like I said, your your, your mind is metabolic with the environment. And so I'm very careful with what I eat, even if it's information.

Unknown Speaker  43:44  
So what are the psychic toxins that you want not to be eating as far as intelligences?

Unknown Speaker  43:51  
That's interesting. I think of them as kind of invasive species of the ecology of the mind. You know, I think advertisement is a great one. One of the reasons We are driven to distractions because of the culture and advertisement that we have. You know, and then in general things that shorten the attention span by design, right now things that shortening attention span because they're naturally short like a bird flies by. Okay. But there are things that shorten our attention span by design. And so we need to avoid those things because they teach us that that's how information works. So that's how learning is if someone goes to a website where they take an article and break it up into 20 next buttons to maximize back they do suggest avoiding those websites for that's not so much what is it? Maybe it's good article, maybe it's or not. But literally the action of doing that is different from sitting with a book for 40 minutes. And so I'm saying, you know, not engage fully with the culture, but be mindful that you can have junk food for your mind. You can have junk food for your body and the coat. And that's the stuff that the culture wants us to eat. Right? And so you have to find the secret hidden, good stuff in the back, where it's a long article with no advertisements and you're like, Whoa, like, it's actually independent of what you're studying, just focusing for a period of time focused in the muscle of focus, whether it's changing neural structures and the connectomics of it or whatever it is, right? There is some kind of development of the capacity for focus, probably, intensity of focus and duration of focus, right? So that's important, but then you can be focused on very different topics. And you might say that some topics, obviously, whether the information is accurate or not. And if it's factual information kind of matters. But are there certain topics that you think have more relevance, or ways of studying them or ways of thinking about them.

Unknown Speaker  45:51  
And this is where it gets interesting because the very next thing I'm about to say that you also need to learn about learning, which is to say one of the most important Things you can focus on is the nature of development itself and the nature of your own learning. So learn about the nature of learning scientifically, but also learned about your own unique learning needs and patterns, right? So not everyone can sit with a book for 45 minutes, but they can do 15 minutes, get upstairs space, walk around 15 minutes, get up, stand in space walk around, right? So you need to learn how you work. And a lot of research can help with that things like the neuro hacker resources, all of these things should be grist for the mill. But one of the things that you see with people who go post conventional and kind of become self actualize, and move up to these higher levels, that they're very reflective about their own learning. They know how they learn when they learn best, I know what excites them, they know how to follow investigative patterns independently, and set the reflective. So they create these virtuous cycles of learning for themselves naturally, throughout life, as opposed to being kind of extrinsically motivated and driven, which is the schools? Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  47:03  
So this is a quantified self process around it. One way to do it's the quantified tobei that can help. You can also mistake the numbers for reality with the quantified self too. So again, it's not numbers are great if they're measuring something that's there. And that's one of my concerns with the quantified self as I do know the measurement errors on your tools. Like how often does it miss measure your heartbeat? How often does it not capture what it says to be capturing? I mean, blood sugar monitors for example, or a second my second metric of metrological mess, right that is dangerous, you know, similarly with quantified self devices right now and because we want to curate the tools that can help us aquaphor the sensitivity and specificity is not good enough for us to feel that the biofeedback optimization is actually optimizing rather than talk about consumer devices. Of course, there are Medical Group devices that are very good, but we're not seeing good enough correlation on any of them yet.

Unknown Speaker  48:03  
It's interesting. And that's what measurement does. And I think a lot about measurement in general. And one of the things that does is it, we can trick ourselves and a divorce and not knowing what's going on. Sure, it's because you actually think you know what's going on, and you don't. And that's why Demi realities can be weird. And so I love the quantified self, and so far as it's reflective, and it creates that virtuous cycle. But if you're creating a cycle on feedback, that's not accurate, then you can get off course, but someone could have a qualified self feedback that is also wrong, where but that is actually a kind of addictive feel good rather than a virtuous cycle, and they optimize. So this is why you need layers of self reflection.

Unknown Speaker  48:45  
Yeah, well, I'm the same cycle that drive learning drives addiction, right? It's the kind of this is Theo Dawson's refrain and how learning works. You need to actually kind of Co Op so kind of, yeah, opioid cycle into the delfy Dogmeat opioid cycle into these learning the virtuous cycles as opposed to other things like for example, Video game, research and design, they figured out how to capture, right really well as about that zone of proximal development or the Goldilocks zone. It's not too hard, but not too easy. And so if you know about your own learning, you can put yourself in that situation all the time, where you are not in over your head and challenge to the point of giving up, but not it's easy to record, so you're not learning. So that again, just an example of what's being reflected by Joel learning give you the ability to stay in that zone of proximal development, with most of all of your tasks. I'm curious to hear your thoughts on something. There are a few kind of neuro hacking methods that have some early indicators that they elevate IQ using that shitty old metric for whatever it's worth. So there is a neurofeedback study that showed multiple point increase in a week of particular form of medical neurofeedback, there was statistically significant in adults where that supposedly doesn't change. There is a there's a technology that website called thing up. And it's basically sensory motor coordination activities that supposedly drive neurogenesis MRI showed increased hippocampal volume because you're actually increasing development of progenitor neurons. And it also should develop elevation of IQ amongst other meaningful scores. It makes sense, right? There's a plausibility that neurofeedback if you're actually taking signal from the brain feeding and back to the brains, the brain gets a whole new sensory bandwidth that it didn't have to refine its own process. So you get increased signal to noise of process within the organ of computation itself, at least one of the organs of computation, that that could increase its efficiency of process independent of information, content, information input, right, just process information. And it makes sense that if you're increasing neurogenesis and you're getting actual great Matter density increases, you can increase the, you know, the computational bandwidth of the system. What do you think of these kinds of things? And are there things that you that you know of that you think are meaningful intelligence developing capacities that are kind of physiologically oriented? That's a great.

Unknown Speaker  51:21  
So I love biofeedback, I think, you know, I think many forms of, let's say, mental distress, extreme states of consciousness, you know, the things that people seek psychopharmacology for typically from a psychiatrist. And these are these are issues with the brain often physiological issues now that means we need to treat them somehow by working on the brain. I don't think that means we need to intervene necessarily some drastic chemical way. I think there are ways to do it that are like you're saying brain and train them that are not let's say, cognitive behavioral therapy, but much more like flooding the brain kind of perceive itself. And work in that way. I think the way you describe how it probably works is probably correct. Now we have to remember, of course, that there were moving IQ tests are not necessarily moving on cue. And so I think we need to have the quality on the inside of that quanta, which is to say, what does it feel like after going through those types of biofeedback techniques? Do you feel more capacitated more lucid and insightful, for example. And that's, I think the proof is in that pudding, and also with things like predictive validity, but I think these are most promising for me of these forms of biofeedback, you know, I think the brain and the body shouldn't be separated at all. And I think one of the limits to contemporary neuroscience is that separation. So, you know, the forms of somatic practice that get people to inhabit their bodies more, I think have a lot of potential. Things like, you know, the spatial dynamics, yoga and Tai Chi, you know, which bring the brain back into the body and not out of it into some to just feed back. And, you know, so I think one of the issues we have and one of the reasons we're seeing kind of an epidemic of I think, cognitive underperformance let's put it that way. A really nice way is the fact that people's bodies themselves are hurting before it ever can be kind of a neurological thing. So so that's will be some general advice is health.

Unknown Speaker  53:36  
So let's go mechanistic for a minute. Right? If someone's body is actually hurting, right, they have physical pain because of their bad computer ergonomics, or whatever it is, then we know that pain is mediated via chemistry and nerve signals. So you're going to be having continuous noise input into the nervous system. You're gonna have inflammatory chemicals inflammatory cytokines that can cross the blood brain barrier, Kazmir inflammation and affect all aspects of top down neurologic function including cognitive. So getting out of pain is a way to actually take a load off the nervous system, increasing its capacity and bandwidth to deal with other stuff.

Unknown Speaker  54:11  
So that's a much clearer way of saying what I was trying to say. That's exactly what I meant by saying that,  but we can think of a lot of mechanisms, right. So there are there's a lot of studies going on regarding epigenetics, genetic expression from various forms of exercise, and aerobics versus anaerobic versus high intensity interval training actually affects different gene expressions. And there's something like 7000 genes that we've identified actually have epigenetic modulation with different forms of exercise. So that means that whatever we thought was maybe genetically attributable as innate is also not fixed. Right, it's changeable and it might so your yoga might be affecting some of those things through the breath through the panel. parasympathetic processes that are happening from the slow movement and the proprioception right from the kind of physical stimulation that might happen. We might also see though, that there's certain kinds of benefits in high intensity interval training does to increasing right like the good stress on the system that leads to up homie said a capacity that yoga doesn't. Right? So you but like I'm going to make a distinction between things that increase capacity where the capacity was already decreased from baseline because of pathology right pain is pathology versus someone is already in pretty good health. There's no obvious pathology and now we're wanting to increase baseline. So I'm curious as you as you forecast into the future and you think about some of the developmental possibilities is obviously like pretty wild. Future tech scenarios You're actually getting not that far right like Brain, Brain chip implants are becoming something that is a lot of companies are investing pretty heavily in where you would just augment your processing capacity with the processing passive, the entire cloud running on quantum computers. Outside of that, right? Let's assume that we don't get that ever or anytime soon. And we're looking at increasing endogenous processing capacity of this system. What do you foresee? If, if things go well, in terms of us being able to have decreased stress, better medical systems, better schooling, education, psychological development, what do you see in terms of then not too distant future human intelligence? as what would the general capacity look like? And what might some of the modalities that we start engaging? Like, right, right.

Unknown Speaker  56:53  
So what I mean, yeah, so the kind of concrete utopian vision of the future of intelligence, you know, would be one where the baseline is raised in a huge way, right? So we have a basic income guarantee and kind of an integral social safety net and some of these other social miracles that I've written about, we would look at something like a broad kind of raising of the floor of what's called general intelligence, just because so much as a result of that, you know, but I think for the individuals looking at the cutting edge, you know, I think it's about horizontal and vertical growth in a simplistic way. That's kind of stereotype but we don't know the range of people's multiple intelligences, which is to say, the first step for many people is just to explore lines that they have not explored, right. So it's not they keep going up. We can talk about that. It's about going, going wider. Right. And it's we already discussed this briefly, but that I think, is something that people will have the freedom to do in a way they've never had before. If some of these other things get sorted out.

Unknown Speaker  57:57  
Right, wider. They're intentionally crossing.

Unknown Speaker  58:00  
Yeah, did the intentional crossing of line in a space not of scarcity where you're frantically trying to keep your job? And how could I possibly take up yoga, right. But in a space of educational abundance, where your unique scope you like the unique skill profile that you have, as a potential could actually be expressed, I think what we're looking at now are kind of truncated skill profiles, where a lot of potentials are not expressed for a variety of reasons. So I think the first issue is to kind of fill that out, which is to say, to fill out the rest of your kind of profile of what you capable of doing. And that may mean, you know, work in hospice care. Or it may mean working soup kitchen or maybe playing soccer, right. I mean, who knows, but the point being that, you know, we're limited in the ways we can grow, often by this sense of educational scarcity that surrounds us and the limit of time, so you know, No problem, go for it expand horizontally. think another thing again, this is about the unexplored kind of educational frontier, right, another place where we haven't explored as states, right? So do a lot of learning and skill development, but state experiences which the same meditative states, right. And other forms of flow, which is another state that's very popular these days to speak about these, the exploration of state experiences and the way these interface with capacity and development I think, is another place for people to if they're topped out at a certain capacity, let's say, start to bring in a state practice, which brings that capacity to operate under a different state, then you'll find new potential emergence, right? And so it's another thing that our schooling society doesn't give us explicitly, but that we're seeking on the side all the time. I mean, sometimes explicitly, but meditation, but rock concerts, movies, all of these things are subtle state inducing causal statement music. So I think there's a way that one we're not as concerned with manipulating, and kind of competing. And when there's a sense of, as I say, educational abundance, then the value of those state experiences, aesthetic experiences, estate experience, and the rapture of a sunset is a state experience, like the value and the intrinsic value of those things will become clearer and clearer and clearer.

Unknown Speaker  1:00:33  
And it's hard you have to searching for those.

Unknown Speaker  1:00:36  
And I think that but I just want to reiterate in slightly different words, which is that much of how we've been developing ourselves is like monoculture in our mind, right? Like we're trying to produce this thing. So we are just growing hybridize GM wheat fields and our mind and not developing a robust complex ecosystem that can actually Resist four species when they come in and has resilience across a lot of different capacities. So one of the things that you're wanting is that people don't keep trying to just optimize the total amount of wheat yield of their mind. But they're actually seeking to optimize a lot more complex set of things where you wouldn't even really call it optimize, you would call it exploring.

Unknown Speaker  1:01:23  
Yeah, and that's, I think, good for a few reasons. You know, one is that the world we're moving into is not a world where monocultures are going to survive on multiple levels and analogy. So because the monoculture of agriculture came around the same time that we got these mass, you know, kind of post war high schools, and so you're looking at the literally the generation of cultural in mind. So that's deep, and so yeah, so it's about breaking out of that modern culture into this much more kind of symbiotic way of thinking about where's my niche and hasn't been It's going to change as the culture around you changes as I grow and grow more. And so it's very much moving away from a static, kind of almost arithmetical life like in a sense of arithmetic way of thinking about the mind into a dynamical way of thinking about the mind. So yeah, so that's, that's a good, good insight. And so it's about exploration, but it's an exploration, the hope of finding, which is to say that you search and then you find and then all sudden, something grows that never would have grown, which may be exactly what's needed. And that's, I think, the fear of the monocultures that's not resilient. There's all these reasons, it's literally dangerous. So if you can only do one thing, if you can only give one food to the world, and only eat one kind of food from the world, then you're very precarious situation. So we need to all become very, you know, very broad, and, I think, the Renaissance man's like necessary for everybody.

Unknown Speaker  1:02:57  
So I agree with this and there's an interesting point. I want to bring up two friends where I've had this conversation the last few weeks, who have something like six standard deviations, more computational processing power than most people off of normal assessment curves, they also have other underdeveloped capacities as a result of how they've developed them. And they both expressed fear in doing things that would develop those other capacities because of not wanting to lose the unique capacities that they've developed where there's a question of like, have I have I allocated all of my normal process in some zero somewhere, even if it's positive, some fixed, you know, positive some kind of way where I am now a very useful tool. And if I were to reallocate it, it might make me feel better, but I would actually be a less useful tool to how founded Do you think that kind of concerned in those outlier cases is?

Unknown Speaker  1:03:53  
I mean, I think, again, these are deep questions in the philosophy of education, which is about what What's a good person wants a good society. And I think you don't want to put a square peg in a round hole. So there's a there's a uniqueness factor. And there's a kind of where does the puzzle piece fit factor. But there's something true also about that fear I this is kind of a far transfer of the word, but I remember David Lynch or the great film director, he went to do psychotherapy. And he was like, you know, if I do this, you know, what my arts offer and the therapist was like, maybe, you know, and he was like, Nope, not done. And so he was willing to, like, live with the wound to do the art. And so I think some people may be willing to live with a kind of truncated old set of skills and the kind of withered limb as it were, in order to have this super strong branch over here holding up something that needs to be held up. So I think there's a not we don't want homogenous, you know, but the question is then about, what does it feel like to be them and there are other things that If they could change them and not lose that they would and so I'd have a conversation that would, but that's a deep question. I think we're looking at a society of increasing neurodiversity and increasing kind of unique individual Nichkhun. And so we need to be careful and judicious about trying to fit square pegs into round holes and trying to maybe perhaps make new shapes you know, fit the shape more to this unique neural profile, then to what the, you know, she needs and again the machine is that arithmatic mentality, the machine, whereas the dynamical mentality is one where was that kind of CO active system between both?

Unknown Speaker  1:05:42  
So, yeah, this is the educational futures of for those who don't have the language, machine is a complicated system, right ecosystem is a complex system. ecosystem is changing. It has no fixed blueprint cannot predict its future stage from the current state perfectly, and it's self organizing and running. fonts to its environment complicated system might have a lot that goes into the circuit design to the blueprinting of it. And but once it does, it's fixed. It is not self repairing, not self organizing, and not adaptive. Humans understand complicated systems. We build them. All right, we understand the much better than complex systems, we're just starting to understand complex systems. So you're thinking about the mind is a complex system, which is, of course makes sense because the brain is a complex system, the physiology complex system ecosystem is right. culture that's informing the mind is a complex system. And that one of the things that it sounds like you're saying is that we've been using complicated system metaphors. How do we make it a better machine a better computer a better robot a better you know, Turing machine, whatever, right? For something that is actually a complex dynamic, which means supported in fundamentally different ways and you optimize complicated systems. you support the emergence of complex systems. So rather About reductionist metric optimization of a complicated mind, we think about what supports the flourishing of self development and auto felicis of a complex mind. Right.

Unknown Speaker  1:07:13  
Right. Beautiful. Yeah. And that's, again, that's both the the kind of brilliance of the IQ. And the tragedy is that it's simplify this incredibly complex thing to a single number, which had some, you know, was useful. There's also dangerous but but you had the mind is not like that. It's not complicated to radically complex. I mean, it's literally the most complex thing in the universe, aside from the universe itself, right? This is the brain. And so the inside of the brain is that now, again, start to do some state practices, and you'll see that there's, there's some of that, so it's just very interesting to think about what that future of the brain and education you said one thing that was so important, which was you know, like complicated, versatile, Lexus one big distinction. But one of the other distinctions was intrinsic versus extrinsic value. And most of the time when we think about developing our intelligence, we're thinking about how we can be a better tool either so that we can crush the competition or make more money or you know, raising some corporate ladder like be better at some task that we can be externally. And that might be just because of wounded childhood ego that didn't feel enough and and being smart was our compensation strategy. So we get to be enough and you know, like it. And you're asking this question of while developing our extrinsically, recognizable and valuable qualities, what is the intrinsic quality of experience of how we are developing and just experiencing life moment to moment and valuing that and obviously for an educational system, valuing the child's intrinsic experience as well as developing their capacities for extrinsic utility, but not mostly just seeing them as utilities, for the future of the economy or military or whatever. But then also For all of us, as adults really pay more attention to balancethose two. 

Unknown Speaker  1:09:03  
Yeah, absolutely. I think we're, you know, extrinsic motivation is part of what it means to be alive. You know, I mean, there's always going to be extrinsic motivations. But if that's all you have, it can become very difficult. And it's a classic principle. And, yeah, psychotherapy, you can't, you're totally dependent upon the world. You're very vulnerable. It's a very precarious situation. And it feels that way when you're trapped in a situation of time to extremely valuable. So freeing your goals from that transcending, but including extrinsic value, right, which is the set, you get that and then you move beyond it that you include the kind of getting the extrinsic skill, you include that within this broader project that's intrinsic. Similar to that transfer thing we discussed before bringing it all together into a kind of coherence of development of self. So interested party, you know, that's part of it. You know, again, as I said, the people who become post conventional, you find them to be self directed learners and intrinsically motivated. And even those who are a great example of this is dyslexia, right? I'm dyslexic. It's, it's actually true that dyslexic, you know, who succeed, the reason they succeed is not because of the special training they receive. Typically, it's because they attach an intrinsic motivation to something like reading. And so you find all these stories of, you know, high achieving Dyslexics, at some point in their childhood, they found something they were just passionate about. And so all the pain of school, and all of that didn't matter anymore, because they were intrinsically motivated. And by the way, along the way, they got these extrinsic things handled, but they're doing them for their own reasons. And so there's something I think many of the people who are the valley crossers and being Mavericks announced dieters and traditional schooling precisely for this reason, because they're doing it for their own purposes, they're intrinsically motivated. And the school demands certain extrinsic things. So that type of separation and learning from schooling often follows from the separation of intrinsic and extrinsic. And that's the advice I give to most of my friends who have kids and like, separate learning from schooling. Learning is awesome schooling sometimes can be sometimes not so much. But if you confuse those and think learning is what takes place in school. Yeah, then you'll never learn for the rest your life and so that intrinsic motivation is huge. And but that gets really deep really quickly. That's the problem with intrinsic motivations. And you go directly from real simple questions about what am I learning to deep questions about? What's the significance of my life? What do I really want to be? What kind of person am I ready? What can I transform like? These are the deeper question which to the degree that we are wanting to raise children to fill roles and a predefined system. We of course don't want them to ask us what they have to ask now. Exactly.

Unknown Speaker  1:12:07  
Okay, this has been a blast. As we're wrapping up, if people are interested in understanding their capacities as a baseline to both see what is most relevant for them to develop, and then to see if the developmental things they're doing are working, other than IQ. What might you recommend to people as ways they can assess their intelligence, their multiple lines of intelligence, their ecological complexity of thought, like, What is electical? a useful tool? What are some other ones for assessment?

Unknown Speaker  1:12:42  
Yeah, matica. So you can go to electic.org. And I'm sure they'll be links on the neuro hacker website that we can put there. And there's a there's a few assessment options I like to go which they get it that spectrum from abstraction and complexity in particular lines, and these can be useful for self diagnostic purposes. There's a whole bunch of uses Electrical assessments. So I think those are important. addition, again, it's about the standardization and psychometric servitor valuable array of assessments out there, which you could use in a quantified self type way. And so I would never discourage people from exploring those, but I think, you know, keep in mind all these lessons about measurement and measurement of the mind in particular, and taking with a grain of salt, you know, and know that, you know, flying blind, which is the same without measures is better than flying with measures your trust that a wrong statement, that's just true. And so, play with them, but really be careful about the ones you hang your hat on.

Unknown Speaker  1:13:43  
And, you know, journaling is actually extremely important developmental catalyst. So, which is to say witness at all, note at all, see what's working, see what's not working, pay attention to yourself, and sometimes journaling really can help That fundamental way, and you can do it in a structured way. And there's a whole approaches to doing that. But I found it to be valuable for people that I know for myself. So that's just another way of assessment. You know, you talked about the quantity and the quality, right? And so that's the qualitative assessment of self and you can keep it running lugging around head, but writing it down helps gets it out.

Unknown Speaker  1:14:24  
And have you seen any correlation of things like different forms of imaging, so say MRI is that we're looking at neural density, QE G's, and different forms of psychometric or intelligent scores that you think are either already valuable or promising of a new kind of mind brain interface? Science.

Daniel 1:14:51  
I mean, this isn't really my field. I mean, I've been really intrigued by the meditation research that's coming out of Madison, Wisconsin. I think that's where it is. And it's interesting because it's an ancient technology of self development. And it's showing profound neurological, as you'd expect, but it's just shocking to see really how how Stark some of these findings are. So that's intriguing to me. But yeah, that's about as much as I can say, you know, and so I'm kind of old school methods, I think it's part of my part of it comes from my caution around the assessment, you know, which is to say, the DSM is a nightmare. The IQ tests are a nightmare like don't Capstone, articulate yourself understanding in these languages handed to you. You know, find new ways to think about yourself things like lactic koken help like that, but I use a deduction matrix and wrong metrics are concerned for you, but metrics, objective metrics about subjectivity or their own category of nightmare.

Zak 1:15:58  
Right, right. Yeah. And then you get the metrics at work. And then those are scary for different because they actually work. And so there's too many. We can just jump down another rabbit hole, Daniel, where we need to go.

Daniel 1:16:11  
Well, this is good. Zach, this was a blast. Thank you. This is a really fun first podcast for us to do and a fun topic and I imagine people might have a lot of follow up questions regarding assessment and development and etc. And we might get to follow up on those. So thank you.