Zak 0:00  
You're trying to give the people something will help. You don't know exactly what it ought to be.

Drew 0:06  
Welcome to the teach thought podcast. Terry, introduce yourself. 

Terry 0:09
My name is Terry. I'm a former classroom teacher and now director at teach thought, which means I do a lot of different things very badly. 

Drew 0:15
And I'm Drew Perkins, I'm the director of professional development here at teach thought. And hopefully that means I do a lot of different things really well. 

Terry 0:20
And together we're hosting a podcast, which hopefully makes teach thought more accessible to you in more places writer.

Drew 0:31  
Well, hopefully, yeah, but mostly, it's just me hosting it because you just had episodes every so often, right?

Terry 0:37  
Well, you know, I've got things to do. Remember, I'm director.

Drew 0:54  
That's true. As always, thanks for tuning into the podcast. My name is Drew Perkins. I'm the director of teacher Professional Development. And of course, we always welcome folks to visit or invite folks to visit our website, which is we grow teachers.com To find out more about our workshops and services and of course our summer teach thought pvl grow 18 learning event which by the time this is published, our registrations should be just about wrapping up for regular registration. June 9 is the cutoff for that. And then, of course, we'll have late registration so again, you can find all that information at we grow teachers. com. today's podcast, I spoke with Zach Stein, who built himself least on his website as a writer, educator, and futurist. He is deeply involved in work around social justice and education. He's a scholar at the Ronen Institute and serves as co president and Academic Director of a Think Tank of the Center for integral wisdom, as well as some other things that you can find the information on his website, which is x time.org was really fascinating and deep conversation as we explored the role of education and how that sort of looks in the modern versus postmodern versus his his work, which is meta modern, talked a lot about social justice, a little bit about IQ, constructivist and progressive education and paternalism, sort of teacher authority, and what role teachers should play in a meaningful education and lots of other things surrounding that. So again, really deep and thoughtful conversation that I enjoyed, and I hope you do as well. Without further ado, here is sex. All right, welcome. I am here today with Zach Stein. Who's calling in from Vermont. And I'm going to let him unpack his varied background and the roles and the work that he does. But I'm anticipating a really thoughtful, deep conversation as we get into education and learning and perhaps some developmental psychology. So Zach, welcome to the podcast.

Zak 3:18  
Hey, thank you. So it's a pleasure to get a chance to speak with an educator and kind of speak to other educators. So a few words about me, let's see, I am what is sometimes referred to as a high achieving dyslexic. And so I've been in kind of a strange relationship to schools from a very young age. For so for a long time, I looked at schools a little bit differently because I was in all of the Special Education Programs, first in New Jersey, and Massachusetts. And so, you know, that led me have a natural curiosity I think about the nature of learning because I was told by my mom who was especially educator and then by the great, you know, the great teachers that I had, that I learned differently than other students. And so right away I thinking Well, there's there's not one way to learn, right? And I was noticing there's people who learn different ways and etc. And so I went on this kind of very non traditional learning trajectory. I taught myself music and began to read way outside of classes, even in high school. And they're going to Hampshire College, which is also a unique undergraduate institution where there's no tests and there's no grades and you don't get, you know, you get these long written reports. And so I went there because of that I wanted to me, yeah, totally. And that's why I went there because I hate an F. You know, actually, as a senior in high school I wrote, or maybe a junior I wrote a letter and circulated it to the administrators of the high school protesting the essay T.
And specifically, the monopoly of the Educational Testing services that was well received by a couple but not by the key people. Anyway, so I went to answer because of that, because I knew it would be a crazy place. And it was. And then I managed to go from Hampshire to Harvard, which is, which is an interesting move. So I didn't have a GPA leaving undergraduate and bomb the JRE. And through sheer force of will, and kind of getting really close contact with a couple key professors. And of course, the, you know, the writing sample, etc. Like I managed to get into the master's program, and then the doctor doctoral program at Harvard. And there I continued my habit of reading way outside of classes, and ended up writing a dissertation that became a book immediately published through rootage on social justice and standardized testing. 
At the same time in graduate school, I was working with Dr. Theo Dawson, who I met at Hampshire to to build a non profit that could potentially change the whole standardized testing infrastructure. That's called electronica. Theo still runs that and it's going strong. It's great work. And so I stepped back from mucca in order to continue to write and to do freelance scholarship, essentially. And so, I've been working with think tanks focused on cultural reform, specifically the Center for empirical wisdom. And I've got a seat as a scholar at the Ronan Institute, which is very interesting, again, non traditional academic institution that's housing a bunch of scholars who, for whatever reason, don't want to be or cannot be in the traditional Academy. And so I spend most of my days writing and doing consulting and speaking around issues of education, education reform. I'm particularly concerned with the kind of current rapid transfer nations and global culture and identity formation, specifically with regards to the internet and changes and the economy and the biosphere, which are I think altering the things we need to consider as educators and the things we need to consider in the design of schools are very different today and will be even more different, let's say 10 years from now than they were for the past 30 years, the rate of change itself is accelerating as it were. And so that's kind of a space where I hang out, you know, my, my graduate training was in Educational Neuroscience and cognitive developmental psychology. So I did a lot of research and I've been in the field in developmental psychology and some neuroscience so I've got that that background as well. But my passions kind of basically philosophy, which allows me to kind of be interdisciplinary by nature, and that's why I tend to love talking to educators because any good educator good educator has to think interdisciplinarily by by the demand of the task basically. So I find educators actually more open to philosophical reflection than specialists in many other fields. So that's why I'm happy to talk to you today. And I'm think it's going to be great conversation.

Drew 8:16  
Yeah, I'm looking forward to it. And let's kind of start with maybe a more macro approach. And one of the things that we talk about here or is sort of our mission statement or action mission question, because we really believe in inquiries revolves around preparing students for the what we call the modern world, which of course is you know, we have to really think what what will the modern world What does the modern world demand or what will it and I'm before we get too deep, I'm wondering if you have any distinction or where you placed your place yourself on sort of the spectrum between or around post modernism and what's the I guess being called meta modernism and how you see your work in your thinking, finding a place in that spectrum, right?

Zak 9:08  
Yeah, great question. I would definitely identify as a meta modernist. And so, you know, looking at the evolution of culture, you know, from the ancient cultures into modern culture, and then from modern culture into postmodern culture, which is the which is mostly where we are today. There are some who speculated, you're aware of their work, who that there's a new emergent, which is meta modern. And now this gets weird, just how many other prefixes Can we put in front of modern? I'm not I'm not super thrilled about the term but I think it does signify a break from the postmodern and the ability to consider the critiques of post modernism and the complexity that post modernism ads and also consider what modernity brought us the benefits of what the modern revolution brought us to consider the benefits of both is a novel possibility.

Drew 10:05  
So before you go further because I want to be sure that listeners, I don't want to assume that they understand what postmodern means. And so how would you operationalize postmodern? And I suppose you're sort of doing the same with meta modern as you're talking about those differences. But is there a clean, clean definition? So we can work with that?

Zak 10:25  
Yeah, so it's best, and you almost have to characterize post modernism by first talking about modernism, right. And, you know, so modernism, and there's many different ways to define it, of course, and there's whole books and whole shelves of books written about what what modernism is. But I think a useful way to think about it is in terms of the development of perspective taking and so this is I use this definition because of my training in developmental psychology. So what modernism did in many ways was find a way to Really powerfully organize reality around a single perspective and a single abstract perspective. So, you know, one of the characteristics of modernism, and which along with the scientific revolution, and the revolutions of industrial technology that led to global capitalism, you have the ability to start to centralize and to record keep, and to make things objective and make them make sense in unprecedented ways. And all that sense making was done basically through a single lens. And this is sometimes called the, you know, the grand narrative. Right. Which is to say, that maybe other views of what's happening when a colonialist Empire goes into Africa and destroys all the small local farms and builds a single large agricultural venture with perfectly geometrically symmetrical rows and you know, Where you can actually predict crop yields from thousands away thousands of miles away, you know, based on so so when they step in and remove the kind of disorganization and organic Enos of the traditions and replace them with the kind of singular kind of geometrically perfect modern form. You know, they view it from the single perspective, this is the advance, right? What post modernism does most monitors and comes in and says, Well, what about the displaced people? Right, they clearly didn't have your modern view. And they had a very different view of what happened to them vcv the modernist colonial impingement upon their original traditional farming practices, let's say, or educational, or educational practices. So what post modernism does is it says, Listen, modernity. There's more than one perspective. There's actually innumerable perspectives on what's going on in numerable. Literally like there's so many, we can't get a comprehensive catalog of the perspectives. And so whereas modernity had the pathology of the monological single view, postmodernity has the pathology of the aperspectival madness is Ken Wilber's phrase. Right? And this notion is that well, if there's so many perspectives on what's happening, let's say about a colonialist farming venture, there's so many which one's the correct one. And the postmodernist says, There isn't one. Right? Right. The modernist says, It's us. The correct answer is the one that's progress that the Green Revolution so called, which brings more crops to more people, etc. postmodernist says, Well, first of all, check your science because your yields are actually not higher than the traditional practices by this perspective, right. from another perspective, what you've done is exploitative and unjust and destruction of traditional cultures etc. And so it's a very basic conflict between how you view the world to a view from a singular perspective, or do you view it from a multiplicity of perspectives?
So, there has to be something after post modernism, that's culture evolves, evolution goes places. And evolution often works by taking something singular, breaking into multiple pieces, and then reintegrating at a higher level, to some kind of new organic unity. And this is what a meta modern view attempts to do, or a my favorite meta modern view, which is integral theory, or another one like raw bastarz, critical realism, what they do is they say, okay, we're going to let the perspectives of post modernism proliferate, there's many, many, many perspectives on that colonial farming venture, right? Each one has a moment of truth, and yet we can organize them. Right? And yet, we can make judicious decisions about which views are most reasonable, and eventually get a kind of catalog of the viability of different views. And so one of the things that characterizes Is the move beyond post modernism is a reemergence of hierarchy and evaluative distinction and a reemergence of objectivity. But not the simplistic modern objectivity, and subjectivity that has to do with the refraction of different perspectives. And so there's many different kind of currents of meta modernism. I tend to, like the ones that are that are more strongly theoretical, and, but there are others that are simply a static, which is the same. There's a large artistic movement that is meta modern. And then there are meta modern cultural styles, which are seeing with the kind of new eclecticism of a kind of positive global multiculturalism which is different from the postmodern view of the always in conflict, always competing for power. Right there is a view where you could see actually a new synthesis a global Renaissance that's more than meta modern view. There's got to be a reuniting of the fracturing and not not going backwards to maternity single narrative, but a weaving together a multi narratives into a single narrative.

Drew 16:11  
So how does that play into or or juxtapose with? Sort of, I know you like said you've done quite a bit of work on social justice. And you mentioned the hierarchical structures and the the postmodern connection with sort of identity politics and that fracturing, but then bringing that back together so what, how does that social justice picture advance from postmodern to meta modern?

Zak 16:43  
Yeah, um, it's a very good question. You know, the term social justice is actually a difficult one to use these days, variety of the turns to turn to become politicized, right. That's some of my response, which is to say You know, meta modern moves, whether they're political or aesthetic, and the same can be said of integral moves. These are moves that are always seeking to foster synthesis and integration and master multiple perspectives. And so some of what you're seeing from the social The so called social justice can are actually moves that are not that they are moves to escape gub and moves to deepen fracture, and actually to dismiss the possibility of mutual understanding, right. So the meta modern seeks to understand even the degraded and guilty, right, why are they Why are they this way, not finger wagging and burn them at the stake. So there's something about the move to restorative justice that's meta modern and too many so called social justice. Crusaders or whatever you want to call it, I think it's a travesty that the term social justice is being dragged through the mud. That's another story. The point I want to make is that the tactics and ideology of some of the protest cultures are so obviously conflictual, antithetical to reaching out mutual understanding that they become unjust themselves. And this is a tragic irony. And so that what that means is that the reward for social justice is hindered. 
Because now social justice is a bad word. and rightfully so in the mouth of the intellectual dark web when they're castigating some of this paper that's taking place on campuses. And so that makes my conversation as someone who thinks about social justice, actually, in a very clear way, having worked on roles for my dissertation and read deeply with Martha Nussbaum. You know that there's a way of thinking about social justice that's always reconciliatory and that always is predicated upon deepening mutual understanding between parties, as opposed to deepening misunderstanding and animosity. And yeah, so in talking about the intellectual dark web which if folks are not were not familiar with that probably are perhaps more so with the New York Times article and sort of the, the push by the more mainstream media. So Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson and Ben Shapiro and Weinstein, all of those folks and and as you mentioned, sort of the things going on on campus about free speech, and that that position that unfortunately, some some are placing themselves in, boy, you're different than me then because you can't understand me We can't have you can't you because you're different. You can't understand me, which then, for me, in my mind is a place where now we how do we bridge that gap as you're sort of talking About that, how do I understand who you are and use that as that difference, but then then find a place where we can come together. And you know that that's a really difficult piece, I think going forward as we think about equity. And you know that the, the work that you've done around IQ and and we have Charles Murray and his book that talks about IQ and associations with race, and how reductivist that is, because it's really so much more. 
And I'm all over the place with this sort of rant, but it makes sense. It makes sense to free associate to the IQ and yeah, yes, because the IQ is actually one of the perfect examples of an instantiation of the modern perspective, right, because the IQ says that in mind is this thing that can be understood in a single number, and the result of that number is a simple hierarchy of capacities, right? So, you know, there's a deep critique of the IQ, which I run through in my book. And, you know, we can rehearse it here if you want. But I think that the issue has to do with, you know, the the reason we're seeing what we're seeing in the public culture has a lot to do with the structure of the educational system. And this really messy transition in educational institutions between the modern perspective and the postmodern perspective and even the emerging metamodel. Because for a long time, and in fact, most of the people who are in power now, which is to say that baby boomers, these people were educated in modern educational institutions, with desks and rows. I mean, my mom was slapped on the hand with a ruler by none. Yeah, yeah. That may happen in some places. Now, would you be sued? If you did that, right, though, things have changed and you had many institutions and the ones that I attended, are included were this strange amalgam of The modern and the postmodern, where there were still this strict authoritarian structure in many cases. 
And yet intellectually, there was a questioning and a critique, and a multicultural emphasis. And so some of what we're actually seeing play on the public culture is the failure of our broader educational institutions to navigate through the post the modern postmodern shift, and into the metamodel, which is what I write about in my book that's coming out later this summer, which is what would a meta modern school or an integral school system look like beyond both the modern and the postmodern? And so, the trick with postmodern education is that as soon as you go into the a perspectival, where there's not one correct perspective, but every perspective is equally correct, come very hard to teach and actually very hard to learn. Because, you know, teach really authority depends upon some type of it, at least minimal hierarchy of competence, and I'm Understanding and that replies on some minimum relationship to a world that's real, that both a student and teacher standard relationship to. So as soon as you take that away and then all sudden you have a crisis of teacher really authority at all levels of schooling. And that's an interesting situation, a very big problem that is interesting. And one of the disagreements that I've had with a guy named Gary Hudgens who's been on my podcast before he's a Western Kentucky University professor, he's really big into school choice and he's even gone so far as to say competition, you know, drives excellence, those kinds of things, which I think is not and I am looking at your work, I think you would hold that in, in as a value as well that education in the education realm competition is not what we're it's not going to produce the results that we're after. But his his mindset is around giving parents ultimately choice so that they can choose an education for their, their child, which sounds great. And my question is how do we make sure that teaching and learning is of high quality and those choices aren't driven by superficial things like test scores, or even IQ scores or, you know, just those simple reductivist things? And, you know, how do we keep that quality that lens of quality teaching and learning as the main driver? And his pushback is that is that he felt like that's paternalistic. So, it it's in conflict to what he's pushing as sort of school choice saying that we shouldn't be it's sort of the what's the term you use the the teacher Lee authority or teacher really authority? Yeah. Which is, I'm thinking is synonymous to paternalistic, right.
I mean, well, it's interesting. So that's an act when I write about teacher lead authority. In my book that's coming out, I use exactly that phrase, paternalistic and paternalism. This is again an interesting place with a modern and the postmodern come into conflict, and where the meta modern transcends and includes the conflict like so. The idea of paternalism and something being paternalistic is pejorative in the mouth of someone who is postmodern right there's they're saying essentially, how dare you put your norms upon me your rules and regulations. If each perspectives correct, then you can't impose your perspective on another perspective. The modern and of course, like think of Dr. Spock and rice but many people prescribe parenting techniques but but the modern says actually know there's a kind of a developmental thing going on here. And we need to in fact, very strictly regulate and, you know, kind of lay out a geometrical grid of progression for the child to go through step wise perfectly. That's the modern view, we're at this age, you should be this height at that age, you should be that if you're not, something's pathological. Don't mind the growth is nonlinear.
So that's it. That's a conflict. And what that means is that right now, there is a crisis of Yeah, parental and teaching authority to be quite honest, which are, which are very similar. So but there are cons. Obviously, we all admire parents and parenting. And there's something about a good parent, and the appropriate exercise of paternalistic instincts. That's one of the gifts of nature to the human. And so what I feel is that yes, paternalistic that there are bad forms of modern paternalism, which is the classic White Man's Burden, we have to go to Africa and colonize it's our Christian duty to civilize The savages that's a great example of a paternalistic, modern attitude. But any parent knows that you can't just lay out all the utensils on the table and let the kid pick because you can pick the steak knife, right? You want to lay out just the actual options that are safe given the developmental stage and the situation etc. So there are appropriate forms of paternalism and teach really authority. It's easier to see in a situation like that with concrete operations or sensory motor skills, where you don't want to let the kid totally circumnavigate the room, you're going to put a you know, a fence around the fire. Is that paternalistic? Like now? Yeah, there that's the instinct to to foster the life of a child. And so similarly, appropriate teacher really authority is done with the child or learner, let's say more broadly, inappropriate has done to the child or alert. Right? And then sometimes you have Do it in such a way that you are, in a sense, imagining their future agreement with you. So these are three different styles. So the negative paternalism is done to the child, right? This is not who could care what the child thinks or what the child's goals are learning this right.
The next step is, well, Listen, kid, if you knew it was good for you, you know, you'll thank me later, is the healthy paternalism of the child who's not quite cooperative. You know, which is to say that you do a thought experiment. Yeah, it's not arbitrarily exercise authority you're taking to account the kids uniqueness, his future trajectory, all these things you know about him and the intimate relationship you have with them and you're saying, Listen, I'm going to push us I'm gonna push you just a little. The best teacher really authority is when it's a it's a journey together in learning where you're both sharing the same learning goal right there. It's different. The kid says, Listen, I want to learn how to read Read I know you know how to read, teach me to read different from saying, Listen, we're gonna have to sit down struggle to read and also different from you know read every day 15 minutes this time or you did so so I just think there's these different forms and it's too easy to mix all of them together and just dismiss parental and teach really authority entirely when in fact, that's a very dangerous thing to do. And parents and teachers know that that no one really does that there's just this confusion in the postmodern modern conflict, which makes many of the postmodernists overstate their claim. So essentially, when what they could do is move with the meta matter and say listen, there's there's a moment of truth in the modern need to take the steak night up off the table. And to measure kids in a basic way to make sure which ones have such unique learning needs to need special attention like my case with my dyslexia, right there wasn't maternity that allowed me to be identified and kind of sorted into a different category.

Drew 29:58  
Right. I guess I'm hearing then, there's the parallels from modern postmodern to meta modern, that might be with a much more traditional industrial schooling prescriptive model to, or maybe it's not the parallel but the the pushback that sometimes we get when we talk a talk with teachers about teaching and learning from an inquiry, inquiry perspective, which is a pull pull dynamic is of course, post to the push. So, kind of, as you said, we have a challenge, a driving question and a problem in which from which all our questions should be stemming And ideally, and this is hard to hard to do. So I use that term ideally, with with all due process there is that what we're trying to do is get students to voice those content pieces as need to knows in order to answer that and that that challenge, and that Having questions. So it's not because what we don't want is, is if I, if I come in and ask a student what they're doing, and then why we don't want them the answer to be, well, I'm doing this for grade or because teacher told me to or it's kind of, as you said, I'm going to need this in the future, which is really doesn't resonate with many kids. But what we want them to do is, is ideally say, Well, I'm doing this because we're trying to answer that driving question we're trying to, to solve for that problem, that challenge and in the best of scenarios, those are authentic and meaningful and real, not contrived from content. But, you know, again, there's a spectrum there. So one of the push backs we get when we work with teachers in schools and in folks that I think are much more modern in their, from their perspective is that, well, they can't, I mean, if we start the tops of top of Bloom's Taxonomy and ask them to create something without first teaching what they need to know and remember The bottom of Bloom's taxonomy, they can't think about nothing. Well, of course, they can't think about nothing. That's not what we're saying. So it's just this reductive approach to that, that pushback. And as one of the one of the things that you sort of a quote I think it was a exact quote here from from one of your writings is talking about most open source content platforms and I think you're also talking about ed tech but seed all authority to the user. I'm assuming that sort of the the utensils on the on the dinner table analogy here and talking about the classic mistake of progressive and and constructivist pedagogy. So is that is that what you're talking about there? as it were, were that there are some constructivists who are basically saying, just put all the knives and everything out on the table?

Zak 32:50  
Yeah, no, I mean, I've never actually seen someone say that again. One of the problems with the public culture is that we've build character traits of one another and strong men  but yes, They can do an extreme and you see this occasionally, like, let's go back to john Dewey, because he's, he had this problem. He was trying to initiate what you're describing, like, how do you get the emotional goals of the child aligned with the emotional goals of the teacher and, and the curriculum? And I'll get back to a motion in a second. You know, but yes, the classic mistake of the progress for constructivist educator is giving too much freedom. And what do we said essentially was, you know, that freedom is best, which enables more future freedoms. Right. Now, there are some forms of freedom that actually if you allow for them now, you're actually cutting off the possibility of future freedoms. And so this is, you know, the Dewey school classically University Chicago laboratory school, wants to relinquish control became A place where a child if he didn't want to learn the alphabet wouldn't have to learn the alphabet. Or if he didn't want a multiply wouldn't have to multiply. Right? And so they were giving the child the choice to do other things. But at the same time, that's a key freedom that is actually made, like you're cutting off the future freedom by not giving them constraint now, right? So you can think of like, you know, we want to constrain freedom, only in the interest of more future freedom, right? If you like this that's abstract as you can get thinking about it, because it's a bit of the basic issue again, in this dynamic of teacher the authority. 
How does that work? And when are you rightfully able to tell someone to kind of do something or think some way and how do you get to participate with someone such that they asked you to correct their thinking? And this is the other thing, we talked a lot about the mindset of the teacher, but there's a mindset of the student, right. There's the learner mindset. And the learner mindset conflicts with the consumer mindset just worth mentioning. The consumer is always right, the customer's always right. Whereas the student actually wants to be proven wrong. The true student goes to the teacher and says, Please correct the way I think, help me, help me. And so there's something about cultivating the virtues of learning and being a student that needs to be discussed, as well. And again, some of the cultural things don't move against that. So yeah, so that sense of, you want to promote freedom, but not so much freedom that you inhibit future freedom. And then you want to constrain freedom, as as little as possible, or you want to put as few constraints as possible. And those that you do put in place are put in place in the interest of again, future freedom, future ability to learn. That's the kind of duty and way to characterize that. And, you know, he was he worked very hard to try to Get progressive educators to see that he saw a lot of the free schools and really the interesting and artists and innovations in education that were going on at the time that he was most active. And they were again, putting all the knives on the table. And you know, but this was also a time when children had been in mines and been used as farm laborers, and we're actually could probably wield a knife pretty well. That's another that's another conversation about Yeah, the degrees of freedom change as technology is changing culture change. And so right now the equivalent is more like YouTube, in the hands of, you know, like, totally open YouTube, in the hands of a child is the equivalent of there's knives and that they can hurt themselves and get traumatized just from watching YouTube and randomly navigating through it. And so again, who's responsible for that? Is it the technology companies, where the parents and you know, these are the kinds of things that are emerging now in our cultural milieu? They're going to force us to think hard about, again, teach really authority, parent parental authority. What does authority look like? What does a healthy form of hierarchy look like after postmodernity? If we don't answer that, then the educational system is going to be a mess for a long time. because there'll be no way to lock in any dynamics of Teaching authority, no way to embrace thrilled student and no way to, you know, with dignity and expertise work as a teacher.
Well, it's that word authority even I'm sure you you'll get some pushback and probably do get some pushback just in so far as that that that has some stink to it people's Oh, yeah. Don't like that idea. Certainly not the postmodern, because but here's a direct but here's where the postmodernist always steps on their own foot. Because by whose authority that they get to critique me, postmodernists, actually wields a great deal of authority in our society. The postmodernist has a tremendous amount of power in some ways, and with the authority of all the other academics and postmodernists will condemn the people open with, you know, so there's a way in which you can escape the dynamics of power and authority, which you need to do to learn the unhealthy healthy forms of power.

Drew 38:22  
Right, and the idea that hierarchies should end even could go away is just patently absurd, but it kind of and I don't want to stray too far from education, but that just seems like one of the pitfalls that just continually resurfaces in this pop this postmodern mindset.

Zak 38:47  
It does. And again, to me, it's a simple conceptual confusion in some ways. Again, there are there are pathological hierarchies, no doubt from day one in humanity. And in fact, if you look maternity, you can think of maternity, as a way to propagate, you know, rapidly propagate unhealthy hierarchy. And like that's what majority did in many ways. So, but there are very healthy forms of, of hierarchy to, like healthy forms of authority. And so it's about moving past the moment of critique and post modernism into the moment of re embrace. And that's, again, I think, that emotional dynamic and without the right training in educational context, where there's an emotional openness to learning and an emotional openness to mutual understanding and these things, as you're saying, how do we change the emotional life of the student, such that they become equipped to learn in a different way? So yeah, so I hate to say it again, but I do think some of the pathologies of our public culture are very clear manifestations of The Broken kind of slapped together educational system that's still can't figure out if it's modern or postmodern or meta modern. And I think we're going to see situation perhaps with the biosphere and geopolitical conflicts such that we're going to be, I think, thrown into a situation of either regressing back to modern practices. We're moving into a very dynamic, very interesting meta modern form of education. And that's what I'm writing about. And most of these days, yeah, the pushback and the chasm that seems to be widening widening between what I don't even want to get into liberal and conservative as labels but they certainly surface but the left and the right and, you know, the postmodern being certainly more on the on the left and then the right, being much more modern and it just it just this battle and and I hear I hear people who I think Dave Rubin had Thomas Sol on his program recently. And he has lots of great ideas and then it comes to education. And it just seems such a reductionist modern approach that I'm just banging my head thinking, such a smart guy and and he's, it's not hate him alone. But it says, like, like you said, so this sort of call for going back to much more traditional, at least that the the language that I've heard, I'm certainly not an expert in, in his work, but like, we can't think about going back there. But we also can't live in this postmodern sensor, this meta modern, seems like a way forward where we are really thinking more deeply about the landscape. And I guess, as you as you've written and talked about the, the traditional education system and your thoughts of where should be going, and perhaps could be although, as I as I Read it. It seems just so utopian, almost mind blowing Lee impossible from where we are right now. So I guess if you would kind of dive into that a little bit like what what? Explain that that difference between where we are right now and where you think we should be in the future?
Yeah, I mean, great.
I think the best way to characterize this so, you know, in my book, I think about meta modern education, emerging as a result of the intensity of global dynamics, in terms of the economic systems, the biosphere and identity and culture, which means I've seen meta modern education emerge out of the pressure of global crisis, and the crisis is a multi fold crisis. And right now we're living with educational systems that are more or less pretending that back the multi fold crisis. of the world system isn't occurring. So now, if you imagine the that this crisis is occurring that actually 10 years from now, it may be hard to run actually literally like logistically for a bunch of reasons hard to run schools, the way that they're currently being run. So we're going to be forced to re think it in a major way. And we're gonna have all of this new technology. And so I what I'm predicting in the sense as a futurist as an educational futurist is that we're going to see the emergence of what's more like a network of educational hubs that so instead of the large single High School, you have a dozen or so small locations, which serve as Nexus points for teachers, students and community to come together around intergenerational help and transmission of the youth. So it's essentially a kind of a vision for a reason Doug's of Paul illage, you know, D schooling idea, which is the idea that in many societies, there weren't schools. And in fact, the kids just picked up all kinds of stuff through their spontaneous interactions with the elders, who would allow them to observe work, participate in work, hold special sessions, etc. You can imagine giving like something like an educational credit card, which allows you to redeem for time with an elder, some kind of educational interaction. And now fast forward to the internet. And you see that we could set something up like that with a skill and time sharing network that's focused around the single educational and so, so I talked a lot in my book about that contrast between the kind of large centralized, modern, postmodern school system which is straining under Resources and all kinds of problems. And this kind of agile, flexible, meta modern education Hub Network, which will actually free the youth and the parents. And so again, you're right that it's utopian. And I explicitly say in the book that some of what we need to do now and some of what characterizes them out of modern, is concrete utopian theorist, which is to say realistic alternative futures that are adjacent to this one that would require some miracles, but that are very real, given what we have available. 
This is like the work Buckminster Fuller did when he said, Listen, we have everything we need to feed everyone live happily. We have everything materially that we need. It's a question of politics and the moral will. And I feel the same way about education. We don't need to make education a scarce resource anymore. We don't need to have all of this competition, and all of this elite status and all of these accoutrements and problems with the hierarchy of traditional modern education, we can begin to think very differently, but it requires hope. things changing, not just the schools. That's what I'm saying, I have to see it in the context of this meta crisis, you have to see it in the context of economic system changing. For example, like technological unemployment, it's something that basic income guarantee, I've changed the game in education. You also have ecological crisis, which can change the game in terms of disrupting supply chains and bus routes and things of that nature. You had the cheapening of educational technologies, like computers, which can now be put in every kid's hand in a very realistic way and do stuff unimaginable even five years ago. So all of these factors are going to congeal. And I think it's it's strange actually to think about the educational system 10 years from now and and wanting to think of it as like a better version of the one we have. You know, like, we need to think about something totally different emerging.

Drew 46:50  
Yeah, we sometimes joke here -- think about you know, like,  when we think about the schools of the past the same way that we thought about seat belts in cars like how could we ever have written around in cars without seatbelts? And that's absurd, right? But, you know, when will we get to there? And how do we get to there? Because as many have pointed out, we continually try to refine a system that is doing or has done things that are not obsolete. So we have to redefine how we're doing that. And you know, what is what are the what are the commodities and education? That will be, I guess, non negotiable for success of individuals as in 10-20-30-40 years is it? It's clearly not content mastery. And we talked about just yesterday had a conversation with a school, talking about how different it should be. It's not that we should expect people to come out of any course or class or school with content mastery, but to be able to think like a content in Expert if you will. And the difference between being an expert and having expertise and the the ideas and the even to go so far as is how that looks as a teacher, right? So we're not delivering the content, we are architecting the design of our instruction so that we're creating scenarios in which we can find just that fine razor line, as it is we demonstrate the artistry of teaching, to know when to push when to put that come back, you know, sort of what you were talking about earlier is is that's the artistry of teaching but we also have to to be architects of the design, so that we can those situations can arise and you know, that that therein lies the biggest challenge. So is there is there any difference in your mind and what what adults will need in 10-20-30-40 years from Sort of the conventional wisdom of what's being pushed.

Zak 49:03  
I mean, if anyone's telling you that they know what the world's going to be like, in 20 years from now, you know, raise your eyebrows and be skeptical, right? So that would be my first response. And I think that is, in fact, the novelty of the meta modern position. You know, like the postmodern kind of denies the historical and denies the unfolding of denies reality. So it's very hard to know what they would predict about the future. You know, the modern had this lockstep aggressive definition of linear history, and it was getting better and better and better. You know, the meta modern stands and looks at both, and it looks just at the concrete situation and says, Wow, this is a very dynamic moment in a historical unfolding. And we're caught up in certain logics that are that are like moving, like threw us into something unknown. And so I think that means we need to teach people How to learn, like and this is again, the classic constructivist idea is that education should be about how to forever be educating yourself. Educated learning should be about how to forever be learned, and in contexts that are unpredictable and uncertain. And, you know, in contexts where the future really is unknown, that means that we need to prepare people to be ready to learn to be always curious and observant of their surroundings. And you know, all of these other factors, which are very different from a kind of very domesticated, modern, predictable form of education. You know, in fact, being a very good student in some schools today may make you ill equipped to be in other contexts that are more you know, dynamic. And if you look at the people who are like leading the charge in some areas of technological development, real innovators Often they have very unusual educational histories. Fact often, we didn't do traditional modern schooling well at all. So if we could give those types of unique experiences to every kid, instead of getting some of them to be these nicely packaged modern products of education, which no longer fit on the shelf, because turn even shelves anymore for that kind of product, you know, that's very outmoded. And it's uncomfortable to hold that complexity and dynamism though, you know, and we need to learn to turn the kind of almost anxiety of the unknown into curiosity. And so that's, again, the modern and postmodern step back from that awareness of that the world is the world is to be known in the world is to be it's an actual exploration. Right? It's not the modern building of progress where we're going to build this perfect thing. Society humans are evolving and continue to extend floor.
So, so yeah, I would, if I was going to build a curriculum it would be about specifically teaching adolescents about the learning sciences and about their own brains and about their own bodies and how the body adapts and heels and how the mind learns and evolves so that you would give them sovereignty over their own future development, both physically and psychologically. That metacognition, we rarely have time for in a industrial model, and even in lots of classrooms today, that that being okay with uncertainty and not knowing and the idea that we, we certainly know lots of things, but there are, there's an infinitely larger amount of things that we don't know. So what questions do we need to ask right? What what are the most Beautiful questions that we should be pursuing. Because there's just an unbelievable amount of questions. And we should probably choose wisely.

Drew 53:10  
Yeah, that's right. And, you know, the dominant question, driving education in modern context is how do I find a spot in a social system? eg How do I get a job? Hmm. And I don't want to reduce all of it to that, because of course, there's always been streams of the humanities and other things. But that's mostly how the modern system was built in terms of human capital theory, where the educational system was actually designed in order to produce workers, for the economy, to feed the human capital into the system. And it sounds critical and most modern, but it's just, it's just right there. And from a modern view, it's, it makes a lot of sense. You know, and, and so that was the dominant question for such a long time and postmodern, kind of said, just make up your own question. You know, and any question that's good as good as any other I think the meta modern may signal and returned to the questions humans have always asked themselves my favorite one being what is the human? Human? Yeah, what does it mean to be human and, and so, you know, even beyond civics and the teaching of nationalism, the nation state that we know reflecting on the human condition itself is something that's going to have to be done at scale in something like a meta modern education system. You know, even if only to deal with all of the crises that are happening, and you know, to find unity, we need to get an answer to that question. What is the human and right now we're very confused about that question in particular, it's a very confusing time and and it coming back to education and and the reform or the growth or wherever education needs to go, is limited in so many ways, I think by the reality that for so many people, Still, even though the future seems clearly moving away from that human capital theory, but there is the reality that we do have to eat and we probably are better served by having a job than not having a job. So, you know, it does, you do have to keep at least one toe, if not, in many cases, a full foot and half your torso in that, that world because you still that's part of the game at this point, even insofar as it's changing piece by piece. And it is, as you noted earlier, a really large ecosystem that and I'm trying to say so we move one piece, then we can move another piece and of course, there's there's lots of pieces. I'd be remiss if we didn't talk a little bit more about IQ, especially if you don't mind is is you have worked with Howard Gardner, which you know, every educator or all Almost every educator, I guess, wouldn't would be very familiar with Gardner and the multiple intelligences. And so what what's your what's your take on that? Or maybe just in a very basic question is you talk about intelligences and talk with educators. Where does Howard Gardner's work? Where should it find its place in a meta modern landscape?

Zak 56:26  
Hmm, that's a great question. I mean, the theory of multiple intelligences, itself, which is, at this point, I don't even know how many decades old I mean, it's it has really stood the test of time in many ways. And is it early meta modern, late postmodern view, you know, clearly in terms of problematizing, that construct of the single unified intelligence as I mentioned, that's the kind of pinnacle of the modern way of viewing the mind isolate to a single number. Howard said, Well, actually, the the mind evolved over evolutionary time. And there are these different kind of modules. Was that came out of evolution and and populated the mind with these different capacities or intelligences. And there's been various lists where he's added a few and and so, you know, I really appreciate that theory. So that I think is important. You know, now Howard is very careful to say like, there aren't many measures of the different intelligences.
So you can't reduce those to a standardized test, which is, of course, what everyone, it's like the first question, people ask him, especially principles and stuff, you know, other tests for these different. So you know, so I think that's important to understand about his work. But I'd rather actually talking about how it's working more recently, which is his work in ethics and professional ethics. And This to me is actually where I see his greatest contribution if I can say that. I totally honor Howard so much and so privileged to work with him and his theory multiple failures was, was, was there and has had this impact. I think he's the work in ethics has been less talked about by educators in some ways. And, in fact, what he identified were forms of engagement and excellence and ethics that constitute, quote, good work. And so that one of the answers to that question I want you to education be about is, you know, should be about getting people prepared to do good work, something we just people laze around if there's a basic income guarantee, even if there's a basic income guarantee, people are going to want to do good work. And what does that look like? 
So Howard answering these deep philosophical questions in about education. And it's the return to those types of questions that are going to need to characterize the educational system going forward. Because you know, even how we get food, and how we get a paycheck, it's going to be very different moving forward. So that means we think basically about, well, how even under those conditions can I be a good person? What does that mean? It's just interesting to note that he saw and documented because The kind of breakdown of professional ethics in journalism. And this was in the 90s, early 2000s. And we're seeing that play out, of course. And a lot of it had to do with the intergenerational transmission of the ethics themselves, breakdown between the older journalists and the younger journalists in terms of transmitting those kinds of professional ethics. So it's just again, something to note and so yeah, when I think Howard Gardner I always think those two things I always want to talk about the ethics because everyone loves me I love the multiple intelligences but in fact, I think it's the ethics work were the most radical implications on the fold, because many of those because many postmodernists embrace the multiple intelligence theory, it makes modern subject matter matters, of course, love it, but the ethics and the idea that there are right and wrong ways to be and better or worse forms of journalism and the idea that we should strive towards professional ethics and educate for ethics. It's hard to say in some context.

Drew 1:00:07  
So is it hard in ways because it's a value laden approach?

Zak 1:00:15  
Yeah. It's devaluated approaches. And it's, by definition is going to say, listen, some people are outperforming others in the area of ethical behavior. And, again, this gets back to what's who, who's allowed to say that? By what authority? Can you condemn someone? And these are deep pedagogical issues of education. So So that would be my response is if we bring all of our work, you know, forward. But I think the hardest work to be done is not going to be around bringing in the intelligence but instead bring in his focus on professional ethics and curriculums that foster deep ethical reflection.

Drew 1:01:00  
That's a really interesting thought because as, as you noted, and we've certainly no secret or Well, maybe it is a secret to lots of folks. But, you know, as the development of artificial intelligence and machines continue, the world of work will inevitably change, which I think is a reasonable argument for universal basic income, whether you're for it or against it, but it certainly it is a reasonable discussion to have, which of course, then leads to the incentive ization and why would people work if they already getting money and all of that so is there a resource or a book or something that you would recommend because I'm not as familiar with gardeners work around ethics, just like most people, apparently.

Zak 1:01:51  
Yea, no, the book is just called Good work. And then there's a few other that follow from that research project. And you know, Picked up with some people who'd studied with Larry Kohlberg who was the great moral psychologists of the 60s 70s and 80s. Neil Kohlberg laid out a stage model of moral development that went from egocentric to ethnocentric to world centric. And that's a very kind of meta modern, hierarchical view of psychological development. You could interpret it in a modern way and think of it just as ladder that you climb towards growth to goodness. But in fact, Cobra was much more complicated thinker about ethical matters. And he saw the possibility for very abstract complex forms of evil. So that the stage model of Kohlberg also factors in here. And again, resuscitating or or bringing life back into these developmental models, I think is an important part of the future of education. You know, these are some of the ways that you foster growth in people is by actually showing them a map of their own potentials. So if you read Kohlberg, and you read the six stages of moral development. When you read that sixth age, you usually there's an aspiration to try to attain.
Unless you're so simple you think you're already there. Right? But the idea would be Oh, yes, you know, this is a better way, this is higher. And the same thing when you see sports, excellence in sports, there's a developmental path that led from learning to just kick a soccer ball to becoming a soccer star to becoming a legend. There's this sequence of development developmental path and, and you map that path and any soccer player is going to want to climb that path. And so I think it's been one of the liabilities of the postmodern approach to kind of kick PJ kicks, the developmental models out when I think they're actually very inspired. So that was a long winded answer to Howard's book, good work, and he worked with people who work with Kohlberg.

Drew 1:03:55  
Well, I'm mindful ofyour time and perhaps that developmental psychology conversation is For another podcast episode, because I think we could talk for days and days. Yeah, so his name is Zach Stein, and you have a book, certainly that is already available. It's called social justice and the ED measurement, and the history of testing and future of education or something like that. Right. And we'll do the show notes. But yeah, so where should people find you? What should they look for all those good things?

Zak 1:04:28  
Yeah. So yeah, social justice and educational measurement. Yeah, that's on Amazon. I've got a website, Zach Stein, z, AK, STI n.org. And my emails on there somewhere, and I welcome emails, of course. And then I've got another book coming out called education and the time between worlds and this book will be out late summer, early fall.

Drew 1:05:13  
Yeah, right. Well, Zach, it's been a pleasure. Like I said, hopefully we can reconvene and talk about developmental psychology and perhaps intellectual darkweb and Ed Tech, and there's all there's all kinds of things that we can talk about. So, appreciate your time. Right on that. That'll do it for today's podcast. Thanks so much for listening. And if you didn't hate it, please leave us a review on iTunes or wherever you're listening and share it on social media wherever you feel comfortable. Speaking of social media, you can find us and all the normal places like Facebook, Twitter, Google Plus LinkedIn, Pinterest, and please share us on those places as well. And don't forget about teacher professional development. You can find us there@teach.com forward slash PD.