Zak 0:05  
Thank you so much. 
I'm very excited to be here. I'm thankful to get an opportunity to speak on this topic of these days mostly been talking about education, and educational systems and their role in in what I characterize as a global meta crisis. And so I've been talking a lot about education because of this forthcoming book. But in this book, there's a chapter which I think is actually maybe the best one, if I can say that. And it's, it's about measurement. It's about measurement as a global issue, and really about the uniqueness of our historical moment from the perspective of the evolution of consciousness. So I'm going to talk about I'm going to talk a lot about that but to pick up on what was just mentioned. So I came to this topic of measurement which is very abstract and weird, in fact, Like I geek out on the interface to Marian staffs that have marks on them, which were some of the first remeasurement. And I geek out on the most ancient forms of, you know, sacred architecture, which were, in fact, artifacts use to codify time. You know, through this through structure that respond to the changes in the sun, etc. And so but I came to this from educational measurement, you know, I'm dyslexic. And so I was consistently mismatch, or felt felt to be, and I realized that measurement is invisible part of our day to day lives. In fact, if you sit there and you think about the number of ways you understand yourself through the prism of a measure, it is in fact, hard to end, the enumeration of the list. And many of these things are in fact, their recent So people don't realize that the use of number two mark our chronological age is something that did not begin on a wide scale until after the Civil War. So that's less than 200 years ago. It used to be you with Elvis, you were the youngest you were born before after this major historical markers such as the flood with the knowledge and the need to know your exact numerical age, let alone your precise birthday. You know, that's an artifact of our bureaucracy. Age is one of those things to number we apply to ourselves to measure chronological time. Weight is another one is a very direct correlation between the availability of the bathroom scale. The mass produced bathroom scale after world war two and anorexia. So I started to see how measures are everywhere and they establish these feedbacks. Whoops. And today in a nutshell I'm talking about is the fact that we are witnessing the birth of the first ever planetary scam measurement, meta structure. So it's a mouthful, and probably one of the worst titles for an academic paper I've ever been. But it's like a very precise kind of description of it. So let me get my slides going.
So this issue of planetary scale measurement is actually quite old. I would argue that humans had been trying to measure the entire world, since we became humans. Know the first attempt to build this thing, which is to say, to build a measurement instrument as big as the earth and to try to measure the whole earth and everything on it, which is what we're trying to do with our increasingly omniscient and artificially intelligent Enhanced scanners and sensor networks that just encircle the earth and upload it all cloud. I'm gonna be talking about Benjamin Bratton's notion of the planetary scale computational stack. And the first attempt at something like that was the Tower of Babel, which you may recall was a failed project. And this is a picture of that was very famous. So the thing to note here, which is interesting is at the bottom of this picture, you see the king and you see one of the workmen addressing the Kings foot. Now it looks like he is in the sense worshiping the kingdom, what he's actually doing is getting the measure of the kings foot.
And this in a very concrete way shows us the relationship between measure and power, even an ancient world. And so I'm going to trace a little bit of the Ark of the contract the history of consciousness and the evolution of measurement and the relationship between us and to move anthropocentric measurement to totally abstract geocentric measurement, and back again, through post modernism. So we're going to get there. But we start with the Tower of Babel, which is really about this project to build a map to basically make the planet into a giant building, to make it beautiful, not enough and tall enough to, you know, either invite God down, hang out at the temple, or to visit him directly.
And so now, since then, it's been a mess. Measurement has been a problem and measurement has been an issue of social justice since beginning, right. So note here, the archetype of justice, right? What does she hold? She has an instrument of measurement and an instrument of violence. This is very significant. And a theme that we were occurring throughout the lecture is this relationship. shift between measurement and violence, but also the relationship between measurement and justice. Right? Which is to say that true justice as the archetype implies, true justice is about seeing objectively and about weighing appropriately in a considered judgment. What is justice what is correct, and then of course, having the sovereignty and power to enforce that this is what you're getting with this relationship between measurement adjustments. So back to educational measurement, this is a picture of Michelle Rhee. She is the kind of infamous one time superintendent of the washington dc schools and she represents in someone who's kind of the epitome of the worst of No Child Left Behind she use standardized tests and just got schools and fire teachers mercilessly. And this picture is interesting for a number of reasons. One is that it shows directly the relationship between measuring And violence within the single instrument. Right. So what you doing there, she's mimicking the classic school Marvel rap you on the knuckles with the ruler, right? So somebody's very pointed here about the double symbolism that, in this case, measurement of violence are literally united in the yardstick and I would say they are. So in the standardized test. There's a coercion to specially multiple choice standardized testing that we take for granted. But in fact, it's a blunt instrument. That's the sharp end of a stick. So when we to think about how measurement is violent, by its nature, now, not everything violent is bad, like surgery and violence, right. Self Defense can be some forms of science. So I'm not making necessarily value judgment on violence. But what I am saying is that if we are going to use a measurement instrument, we have to think like we're acting surgically and not only This is a free intervention. This is actually measurement always does something. And this is where we return to this. So we need to be careful what we measure but want me to think about the nature of violence and measurement of that it measure allows us to impinge upon organic form. So I'm gonna use an example from architecture. So this is a city from the 1300s. In Europe, I believe it's in in Belgium, and the city traffic, a ton of commodities, an economic hub. And it looks actually remarkably like a cell. It looks actually very organic, and it formed very organically. And in medieval times, there's massive amounts of metrological pluralism within Europe as a whole, which is to say every Kingdom had a different King with a different size foot and they use different scales etc. And so in fact, this was a place where many measures are brought together in a centralized marketplace. The point is there was no standardized measure. Now you look at Chicago and 1852 is a very different city.
The only thing organic is actually the river that's winding through it. And that river was shaped about as much as it could be possibly buy him construction. And so the idea that, in fact, you need to structure it this way to run commodities, you know, per unit through efficiently is actually wrong. It's been shown economically as some of these old cities, relatively relatively in terms of population traffic and just as many commodities, right. So what's the logic behind structure in Chicago? It's very interesting. It's predicated on modern surveying techniques and radically standardized measures, such that you know, the city blocks are identical. Therefore, you can lay down this many, you know, sidewalks squares per block. So you can plan a whole architecture whole cityscapes from hotel. Based on the standardization, it was taken for granted by 1852.
Now the relationship between measurement and violence here has to do with the fact that the reason Chicago is structured this way. And this is an argument that's laid out in the book called seeing like a state, which I recommend, guys last name, Scott. The argument here, is it structured like this actually, to quell any possibility of worker dissent through violent uprising. In this city, everyone has a legible address, and every corridor can be populated with police force, so we can find you and we can stop you and your buddies from getting out of hand. And this was an architectural style that was pioneered after the French Revolution, especially by Napoleon. And it was one of the reasons that the metric system was actually spread throughout Europe. the metric system which is the first example of a world centric measurement practice, but not a world centric measurement, meta structure, we'll get to that. But the metric system was spread on the, the metric system was spread around the world on the end of the banner. That's one way to read it. There's many complex history measurements. So there's many narratives, but one of them has to do with standardizing military equipment and standardizing the location of every person in the city. So this is, as I mentioned, at the outset, your actual chronological age, the whole measurement, logic gets turned on the human late in modernity and into post. But at first just the land and the commodity production system. 
What is the matter? Right, so this is Premier, this is a woman only balance so what's interesting about this actually, the picture behind her the painting within the painting is the judgment of Christ when He comes back, right, and what's Christ holding is holding scale and a sword. And so there she stands in the shadow of that picture, holding her own scale, of course without a sword. Right. So the issue of where is the sovereign behind this scale, and it's actually the burgeoning nation state at the beginning of the capitalist world system. So but what measurement is, is a lot of things. But what we're seeing here is one of the most practical uses of measurement. Before the advances into science where we created measures just for the sake of understanding things, measures were primarily created just for practical usage. So in this case, she's probably engaged in some kind of economic transaction about the way to the gold and the jewels. So pre modern measures. So I'm gonna give a little tour here, so that we don't think measurement has always been one thing. In fact, we inherit this massive legacy of measures. And those of us innovating at the edge of measurement technique in technology should be aware of where this came from. And we could actually repeat terrible mistakes, you know?
So, yes. So this figure here is interesting. It's a metrological relief that they're dating here about eighth century BC, and this would have been a common artifact on most ancient kind of construction sites. And so what this is, is it codifies the anthropocentric dimensions of all the key things that need to be measured. Right, and so this is how it began. It didn't begin with the international standards organization. which I'll get to. Nor with the metric system, with a scientifically refined the length of the meter by weight, we know they refined the length of the meter by wavelength of light. That's how precise of this It wasn't like that. You had unity at the work side, maybe unity at the city at best in terms of metrological convention. And then one of the things you do if you're a new ruler, of course, you step in and you change it, because that's one of the things you can do the relation between measurement and powers such that the rulers make the rulers. Alright, so pre modern measure looks like that it was anthropocentric. And what's so interesting about the result of the all pre modern measures being anthropocentric is that there's a certain sacred unity to all ancient architectural sites, because they all have the similar dimension nowadays, which has to do with the proportions of human body. Right. So that's the golden mean Right. And so you find those patterns in pre modern forms of architecture, which are actually somehow profoundly aesthetically pleasing. So as I said, we go from anthropocentric to totally abstract geocentric and back again, what I'm saying is that the meta modern or integral way of thinking about measurement has to do with a return to the human scale. And a concern for proportionality is in ratios that are humane, right? Because the measures of pure abstraction allow us to build landscapes that no humans actually want to live in.
And allow us to build technologies that are, you know, yeah, a little bit crazy, because they live in this realm of of proportions and ratios that are fiction from the perspective of the human organism. So but that's getting ahead of ourselves pre pre modern matters. At a certain quality. Modern measures are very different. And I talked about monitor measurements basically beginning with the metric system, but you could probably do it a little bit earlier. So This is actually a pendulum that was specifically built and designed by Charles Sanders purse is on my T shirt. Good old Charles Sanders purse. So probably the greatest philosopher you've never heard of, if you haven't heard of them. If you have our own, then I don't need to say more. He's kind of a legend. And he built this thing in order to see the subtle fluctuations in the, in the swing of the pendulum due to the gravitational field of the Earth itself. And this was part of the attempts around the metric system to figure out how big the earth was, like literally what is the circumference of their many speculations, but they were actually trying to measure the thing, because they wanted to make the meter, which we all know and love, but at least you guys not in America. Right, so there, yeah. But the meter was supposed to be some specific subdivision of the actual radius of there. Right. So that was the idea. We don't want some kings foot. Right. We're going to make it one measure. For all man for all time was one of the chance during the French Revolution. So understand to overthrow the ancient regime of medieval measurement. It took the American and French revolutions to codify the level of state, let alone inter nationally, totally standardized, reliable measures. And I was a huge actually social justice step forward. Right, I can go to the gas station now, regardless of what I look like, My car is what the gas station attendant thinks to me. And I know I get a gallon, right. And if you actually look at the gas tank, like the gas pump, you'll see there's this little thing that says certified by the state. This is again, you know, you can thank the French Revolution and the call to overthrow the arbitrary fiato of the ruler to set the ruler and to institute a so called scientific universal geocentric modern measure. And so that's that's monitor, monitor measures and monitor measures As I said, we're eventually turned toward the human itself. And we came to not only desire to standardize the measurement of land and commodities and etc, but to standardize the development of human. So this is a fascinating artifact from 1931, which is standardized service worker. And this, of course, has been exponential eyes. labor practices in a place like Amazon, they're using measurement techniques. They've got a path to where we're spraying, you know, with the wrist bracelets actually track every movement of the Amazon worker. So that's hyper measured, commodified labor. 
So monitor measures were eventually turned to the human. And that led to a variety of both advancements and detractions. So eventually, we started to see beyond the pure, simple abstraction of the modern measures that kind of monological view of modernity, and we started to get postmodern measures that looked suspicious. Typically at what was happening in the gaps at the dynamism at the changes at the things that defy linear measurement and require nonlinear ways of thinking about how phenomenon work. And so this is Jay foresters, classic limits to growth. And as you can see, the 2100 doesn't look good.
And that's Yeah, so this is the situation we still face. This is part of the meta crisis, but it took the exhaustion of simple linear ways of thinking about history and simple linear ways of thinking about measurement, in fact, to get a transition into a dynamical systems way of thinking about a manager. And one of the ways meta modern or integral measurement moves into the future has to do with really taking seriously the dynamis dynamical complexity of all phenomena. Such that we never track linearly. And we never do anything like an IQ test, one measurement in a complex dynamical system, you think you know what it is? That's like going in my backyard and taking one measurement and saying no, that's how my backyard works. That's how my backyard yard works on this date, summer, winter, it's are different. So we have to respect the the bias, we have to respect what is by its very nature unmeasurable, or what demands very complex measurement. And so postmodern measures begin to make that turn.
And, of course, the turn towards the human and the measuring of the human is also deepened in post modernism to the point of insanity. And this is actually kind of the big warning. And so notice that someone in the center says halfway point, right, means he knows where you're going or it knows how long you intend to run. has some other relationship to your value and goals. And so we measure what we care about. And we care about what we measure. Those two things aren't necessarily the same, which means that you can be handed a measure and start caring about something you didn't care about for just because you're measuring it. Right? Like, for example, high schoolers would never care about their so called Scholastic Aptitude. But then for about six months, all of a sudden, they really worry about the amount of Scholastic Aptitude that they have. And so similar, we live in a postmodern mess metrological marketplace, where there is just this rapid proliferation of measures directed at us. And many of them are about things that we never even heard of before. And now all of a sudden, there's a number we care about and so this is a very kind of problematic moment.
I'll say jamplay in the development of measurement, and so I'll continue. So what two measures do so I what I did was I tried to give you let me back slide. So you're not just reading. So what I tried to show you was that measures have evolved over time, from things that were local and anthropocentric to things that are now really not local, and really not at the scale of the human. And that's, that's very important. So, but all that whole stretch of things, all those things, we're doing roughly this, they were all measures. They're all just various different measures. And so maybe what the measures do, that's one way to think about what is a measure, which is maybe a little bit too abstract question, but we know kind of what they do. Measures create common sets, once you institute a measure. That's the new way and Everyone relates the thing to shared common sense about reality. So, but they're also creations of concepts. And this is a longer discussion, theoretical metrology about where do measures come from. It's complicated, but at the end of the day, they come from a refinement, our pre existing or intuitions. So measures also serve as shared perceptions of cooperation and competition.
So they help us to get along, but they also help us to compete. And so that's important in general, they are part of what's on the table between us think about third party president at all human interaction, you know, the symbol or the tool or the language. So measure has that fundamental nature, it's, it's really been part of what humans have been up to for a very long time. It's collaborating around measures and creating new metrics. That's because they mediate because The mind and reality they're part of what keeps us in touch with reality. Right? The very first I believe, and William Irwin Thompson reported this very first measurement instrument ever discovered archaeologically is ridiculously old, like, ancient Babylon 300,000 years or something before Christ. And it was as far as we can tell, a stick used by a medicine woman to track basically the moon and her menstrual cycle, which is a simple naturalistic. But what it did was and the for many of the first ones were about time to measure because it's very times actually abstract by its nature and humans relate to time in a way animals don't. And so we needed to start keeping track of time and we started codified, and mediating our relationship between our mind and abstract objective flow of time with this physical thing. Not very primordial about the inter subjective relationship to reality. Getting, I'm just going off because I'm talking about this one. So it makes complexity legible. But it can also simplify complexity.
In a scientific society, it really measures legitimate knowledge. So, even if you're not really measuring something, but you can kind of produce numbers that look like you're measuring something you have helped your own cause I legitimating knowledge or appearing to pretenses of objective around measurement are very important. And that has to do with simplifying complexity. So they facilitate trust, which is hugely important as the reason that they're so powerful, are particularly in the history of conversations about social justice, is that and in the Bible, God says, Please make measures that you all trust. Don't scan one another with the measures, guys. It's very important. And so this idea that it's this locus of trust, and it is kind of One of the common part of the Commonwealth of the community is a trustworthy measure, the only way the community can work. And then of course, they encode power. And this is where it gets really dicey. And there's a whole lot to say on that, which I'm probably going to get to when we get to the next part. So because it's inherently a social phenomena, the issue who measures who always must be raised when thinking about measurement. Now, we live in a world which where we take for granted rulers and yardsticks and gallons are all the same size. That used to be an issue of well, who's gal who's yardstick when you traveled from one kingdom to another, for example, in medieval Europe, but in general, you have to think about the way measures help certain groups understand things.
That's it, if a functional utility, for the most part when they're institutionalized bureaucratically So it's about this unequal distribution of interpretive labor. So people who are in positions of power bureaucratically, they don't have to engage in interpretive labor. Those who are not empowered to do so a great example of this is the tax forms. The tax form is a very complex measurement tool used to basically determine what's going on with you financially. The onus is on you to figure out how to fill that out. That's an example. There are other examples. This comes from feminist and standpoint theory. But in general, those people who are less in power are subject to the interpretations of those above them. And those above them are not prone to reinterpreting. And in fact, codify interpretation through measure. And so once you failed, that standardized test, doesn't matter how it looks from your perspective, that actually that question was weirdly worded. I'm so smart. I interpreted the question differently. No, ETS says you did poorly. So, by their very nature, the measures are usually held by few and affect many. And what that means is that you have these lopsided structures and asymmetric informational environments. That last part is key. And so this has this fast forward to the psychometric. backends tacked on to every website now for advertising, right? radically asymmetric informational environment. Right? We're few people hold the measures, and many people are affected by that. Just to note when there are asymmetric information, because sometimes that's okay, right. 
If you have a classroom of young students, and you have a team of teachers, it's an asymmetric information environment that's developmentally appropriate and a bunch of things that make it work. I think this situation with Facebook, and with those types of asymmetric information environments, aren't that deeply problematic ethically, and it's getting worse, like daily So I'm going to switch gears. So that was kind of like overview, a little bit of measurement measurement history to contextualize what's coming now. And now I'm going to be talking about these worldcentric futures for measurement. This is Bucky Fuller's Dymaxion map, which, if you don't know about, you should totally check it out. So I already mentioned Benjamin Bratton's notion of this planetary scale computational stack. And so it's this intriguing but very, in fact, once you read it, you're like, Oh, of course, this is what's happening. Right? That that that the earth is being circled in a giant mega structure, that is essentially a computer and and the most important thing to realize about this is that it's accidental and he uses that phrase repeatedly. Accidental planetary, computational stack. And you have to get that like I Jim rug, who's at the Santa Fe Institute wants to Like, evolutionarily speaking, you can understand a lot of human behavior by realizing that humans are the stupidest animals capable of culture. We are like the least viable product. Culture, like humans are the stupidest possible animals. Culture. Right now we are the stupidest possible culture capable of generating planetary computational stack. And therefore also the stupidest possible culture capable of generating something within that stack, which is a planetary measurement, meta structure, which is the measurement or description of the stack through the measures within it. recursive but the fact that it's an accidental planetary measurement metal structure should give us all some concern. And so, that's kind of second ended there. Right? I mean, this is so you leave this whole history major and you realize relationship Measurement and power, you realize a relationship between measure and reality, measuring community measurement justice, and then you realize for the first time, we've locked in accidentally a planetary measurement meta structure that, as we saw with Apple Watch goes right to your skin. And they're making pills that you can swallow pharmaceutical companies that have a microchip in them that assure that you're taking your meds, but what they do is they linked the planetary computational meta structure directly into your stomach. And so and this is all unfolding, historically in a time period when less than 200 years ago, we didn't know our own ages by numerical quantification.
So we've gone from a relatively unmeasured species to a radically or hyper measured species. extremely rapidly. So that means we need to sit back and think very seriously about measurement. Again. In the ancient world, we thought a lot about metric. Aristotle, is politics he collected, he claims all the constitution was from all over the ancient world, of course, lost with the library, Alexander burning down. But Aristotle claims that, you know, and we look at what he writes about summarizing these, and you realize that right front and center, in the Constitution's of the ancient world were meta theoretical concerns about management, right, who gets to decide how much is the sack corn, right, the Miller or the farmer, etc. And so we've been running on the success of the metric system, as if everything we measure, turns to gold and ought to be measured. In fact, right now, we need to pause and think very deeply about a whole domain of things that we should maybe never measure. That's one of my claims. That in fact, a meta modern approach to measurement respects the measurable and partitions off regions that are not to be measured.
And that comes from understanding what it means to measure something.
So this gets into the meta theory of measurement. And so I'm thrilled that you guys have already had an introduction to Wilbur to a certain extent, and the integral meta theory that he created with these quadrants, which in fact, retrofit a perennial set of deep meta theoretical distinctions. And so when it comes to measurement, any measurement instance can be an ought to be thought of in terms of these quadrants as a simple way to do a thought experiment about what's really unfolding. As a measures instituted what, what's really happening here? All measures actually have a subjective meaning attached to them, right? So from one perspective, the si t score is just an objective index of your Scholastic Aptitude. But of course, on the interior of the individual, it is, has a whole ton of significance about their future, and their self esteem and all these other things. So any measurement instance can be analyzed from the perspective of is it ethical or just right? So think about the objectivity and the efficiency enabled by the measure. So if you think about this, most of what we talked about when I talk about measurement is the right hand quadrant stuff we talked about is the measure objective, and does the measure enable efficiency? Right. So if you were trying to for example, I don't know You know, just stored in the election. And you were trying to target ads specifically to people who had certain psychological profiles. You'd want to know, are we accurately detecting these classes? Are they real classes are the objective Lee doing as well? And are we doing it in efficiency, like a risk seeding and doing that you could do all of that still be doing psychological measurement hanging entirely out on the right hand quadrant, not worrying about the ethics, or the impact on the subject of life for those people, right. So, once you start to factor all of these things, that's when you start to realize, Oh, we should not measure some stuff.
And so, when you hear people speak, especially about the blockchain, you realize that there's actually this strange to use biblical language, kind of hubris or demonic impulse to create totally omniscient meta structure for measure, right? Like this is odd. I hear people who haven't No authoritarian leanings at all. But who want to track every transaction and every gesture and even like your own mindfulness and good actions towards your mom and stuff, they want to log it all watching. like wow.
Seems epistemologically quite greedy to me. And also like you're trying to sit on the throne of judgment. And so, so we should think about this ideal, this implicit and unarticulated ideal of an entirely omniscient measurement, meta structure, a planetary scale. This is actually one of those things that is kind of bad infinity. The big alien sense it's like a fallen angel, in a Christian sense. So if the arc Angel meta Trump were to run the way of Lucifer, you would end up with an entirely omniscient, inescapable measurement and meta structural planetary scale, right? And Megatron, if you don't No, he's ascended was Enoch, Methuselah, Noah, his grandfather ended up turning into an ark Angel. He's the only one who can sit next to God, because his job is to fucking dictate everything that happens. And to map out the entire body of god that's been manifested. So it's heavy job measurement intensive practice, developed in measuring all of the material world. But of course, that's an archetype and ideal, and to imagine bringing that into physical reality and making a truly omniscient measurement method of structure. That's an example of something. 
Humans get chained to rocks, and then these birds eat out their livers. And, you know, the idea that you shouldn't fly too close to the sun and etc. So this is humorous, as also, irrational doesn't hold together logically, it's very easy to take apart the idea and realize it's possible. So for example, would it map itself with an omniscient measurement meta structure, map its own turn on it, it would have to map its own internal architecture for self regulation purposes. So there are logical flaws within the very ideal itself, which is another thing that ideals have they are often paradoxical. So then the question becomes how do we, in a, in an appropriate way to limit the omniscience was the principal way to rein in what we could do? Because I'm not saying it's impossible, that what I'm saying I'm not saying it's impossible. I'm saying we shouldn't do very different. There's a lot of things in artificial intelligence that are that way too. It's not that they are impossible. It's that they shouldn't be done. And this is not a way that we're used to thinking. But it's a way that we have to start to effect because of the power that we have now. And the accidental measurement meta structure is like an atomic bomb in our hands, in terms of the devastation that it could yield. And yeah, so that's, you know, you think so How do we limit we could measure everything we could make your life. every gesture, every speech act could be measured and logged in the cloud. 
So what do we not measure? So another reminder that the Internet of Things is also if not primarily, an internet of people. And so most of the sensor networks, and even most of the things attracts truly physical properties that don't do semantic analysis or anything. Most of those things are used to track human behavior or human desire. And you can tell a lot about some of them by the physical things that are mailed to their house. So here's the idea integral measurement practice. And this slide contains a lot. And it's essentially unchanged from my 2015 side, and summarizes what's in the paper that's coming out in the book. And so one of the things that characterizes This kind of measurement practice which also characterized as meta monitor. And the reason it's meta monitor is because it takes, you know, both modern and postmodern moves very seriously. We're not dismissing them and saying, Let's go back to the ancient ways, that's impossible. First of all, that is something that's impossible. Because time travel is impossible, but it's also just not the right way to even hold yourself in your, in your being you need to think about a future that has the best of what maternity did and I remember the metric system overthrew the ancient regime, which was exploiting people through the arbitrary fiato of each ruler to set the ruler. Right. So that was overthrown. Now everyone gets the same, right and that's, that's a huge move forward. 
So we can't and that post modernism can lose that step forward. They can forget what was good about universalism when it was overthrowing medievalism. But then, of course, it petrified expanded beyond human proportions. And so post modernism reminds us about the limits of abstract measurement. The post modernism has proliferated the measurement of the human. And in fact, dice does nothing to 1000, fragmented sub personalities and kind of commodified kind of market demographics, which were fed through our screens. And so, I'm proposing that we actually instead of thinking a lot about what we are measuring, which is what we know how to do, that those people who are concerned with measurement and creation of new measures need to think about an ontology of assets. This is the work of Roy nascars, ready to go for this result of thing about absence, which means every time you measure something, you have to think about what you left out. So respect not just what can be measured, technically, but respect even when you're measuring what you haven't measured by virtue of measuring it That's important. When I measured the length of a table, I haven't waited. So let me know what I've measured the length of the way.
What I measured the IQ of someone, I haven't measured a lot of other stuff to say that I've measured this, but I haven't measured Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. linger on the absences, right? That actually frame the presence of you're finding when you measure, right? You don't see it unless you're ignoring something else. That's actually how measurement works. Measurement simplifies complexity by showing you this at the expense of that. So the men of honor move it to say I see this, but I'm aware of that. Right? And that is, especially when you're treating humans, it's just respectful. That's why as a dyslexic, I appreciated this special educators who said, Oh, yeah, the fit measures this, but it doesn't measure these things that you're good at, which is true. doesn't mean you have to Pooh Pooh the sap which you can, which I'd love to do. Right? You don't have to, you can just say, Yeah, it's true, but partial, and every single measure is true, but partial, you have to think that way. And so, as I said, need to respect the measurable presence, the unmeasured allow for uniqueness and uniqueness is actually very technical from a metrological perspective. And uniqueness is an undeniable ontological facet of every entity. And therefore, if you can't find uniqueness with your measure, then the whole purpose of your measure is to destroy uniqueness most measures impinge upon or specifically or designed to get the uniqueness out and focus on what everything hasn't come. But if you throw enough measures at something over a long enough time scale, you can find the unique even in the universal it says a dynamic system Since modeling does, so everything has a temperature, but not everything has this temperature signature, which is a temporarily unfolding. fluctuation of temperatures, which can only be measured over multiple measurements says over time, right? So that's a way to use the universal to detect the unique and not use the universal to detect one of three.
Right? Not using universal effect. One seven, use the universal to detect a unique, very different, and actually a huge challenge, even for the most gifted educators, and basically at this point in possible from the perspective of design, technologically, so that's another conversation. So I talked about the damn ecosystems but, but we have to think of the planetary stack as a resting on cloud not on a rock. The reality of human culture is consistently changing the reality each mind is so much flux and dynamism that if we imagine the stack resting on some piece of like manipulable, rock or clay or blank slate, we're going to do some damage because we're going to force we're going to force things into that mold. So we need to assume as much dynamism as there could possibly be, and then working to find more, that's about again, privileging the dynamical perspective first, then going to the linear if it's necessary, not starting with the linear and then going to the dynamical when you realize the linear model doesn't apply. So it's, it's actually making good on the paradigm change to the financial systems modeling that was prophesized in the 70s.
And then, finally, interiors and ethics and aesthetics as part of measurement conversation. To expand what it means to be an expert in discourses about measurement. And so right now again, remember a symmetries of informational environments and the rulers make the ruler so right now most of the conversations about the future of the planet planetary measurement meta structure are happening in backrooms among experts. And not necessarily because they are like a conspiratorial, but because precisely because they're experts. And no one actually knows how to be involved in those terms. So with the when you do is open these conversations to realize their human significance. And again, start thinking about the ratios and the scales and the relationships between utility and efficiency, and meaning and, and ethics. That's where the main tension, that's the primary driver of my And in many ways, postmodern is efficiency over ethics. So we need to reverse that. Which means we actually need to worry about what's unique, and what's inefficient, God forbid, and not unsustainable or stupid, but not reductionistic Lee mechanistically efficient, which is what we'd like to see the educational system be, for example. So that's the talk. I kind of really kind of went for it. And like I said, I haven't been talking about this much lately. And I didn't know exactly what I was going to say. And, you know, I think I've probably raised more questions for you guys than I have. And this was an extremely provisional and in fact, while I don't regret saying anything in particular, I do have a vague sense that I didn't say a bunch of important stuff, but I should have said. So I'm hoping you have some questions that will find that stuff.

Int 48:10  
Okay, Zach, we meet again, for the classroom. So my question is about measuring interiority, specifically, well being. So you speak to how, whether you think that something that alternate pleasures totally, or if you think it could be measured. Well, what do you think the best way to minister?

Zak 48:53  
I mean that's, that's exactly the type of measure that I think needs to be talked about. So I'm glad really glad you raised that. And so sure you guys are aware that there's actually a huge burgeoning academic field around measuring things like happiness well, and these things and so what I'm going to do is talk about how I would approach evaluating those measures as far as whether it should be measured or not, I think since that train has left the station right, like I don't think we kind of shut that industry down as it were, and let's stop the drilling you know what I mean? I don't know that we're because it seems no at face value, like we should be thinking these for research purposes. So but here's some of the stuff that's on my mind with that right. So definitionally well being is a fucking philosophical problem. Sorry for my French. So that's the first to say about this. 
Right? Are we taking seriously the complexity of what it means to have well be So, provisional studies and happiness show that people who often on the short term are unhappy, because they have been that's, for example, like two young children. Like your day to day lives are if you were like, How you feeling? fucking tired, oh my god and like, but over the long run, they express these deeper, more profound, right? Which people who are happy day to day often have these lingering, existential kind of doubts about the true significance. That's not about is one happier not happy. That's okay. That's about how complex the concept of happiness and well being is at least as complex. And so what we need to do is be very careful what we're thinking about this to be sure that we are not tonifying some superficial definition. Right. That's kind of like socially acceptable and useful. people to be exploited. That's that's my sense. Like, there was a town in Louisiana that was declared to be the happiest town in America.
And it's just because they have grades all day, and it was full of basically very conservative Christians. So yes, happiness down America. Right. This is about the definitional first steps. That means who's behind the research and the funding measure? Who's measuring? Who's deciding? Go ask the healthcare companies who's deciding what well being is, if they decide that's good for you, that's not. That's when you look at the fringes of what's acceptable in medicine, you start to say, Oh, yeah, actually their details in that question. In general, you can see that I'm a little bit skeptical of the current work, because I'm mostly thinking about who's measuring but I'm also thinking about that we live in a time when certain definitions of well being could be.
It can be politicized, what's actually taking place. So that's mostly how I see these conversations now. Which is to say, I don't want to get too radical, but my sense is that there are certain historical moments in which well, you're not paying attention in one sense, right? And so if we're throwing measures of happiness at a population and demonstrating back to them all you guys are actually happy. They may not feel like it but you're actually on the whole you're happy. There's like all these people you're not sitting you're actually happy we proved it is Gala. That's a very weird and nefarious Thank you get, you know, like, what do you do? With the measure you trying to get out press release again, that's again, who's measuring who for what purpose? Or is this being codified into a technology that's giving them feedback improve their. So that's along the measurement things are done. So right papers to argue how healthy our societies So, all right, I could keep rambling there. So I haven't answered your question intentionally. I've just said, here's what I think about these things. If I were to approach it, I wouldn't it would be not something you can like work on a napkin. And this is we'd have to really deeply and who would actually end up being, I think, a politically radically radical product.
Today, if you really figure out how to measure some aspect of human interiority, you realize that we live in a culture that is decimating human inferiority. Like if you can really measure learning, really measured, like we measured electric, you realize the schools are not teaching really measure health. Realize that health care systems, etc, etc. So where are we to really measure well being? very radical statistics to share? So anything that's not finding that I'd be skeptical of, but that's my presupposition. I'll take another question.

Int 54:22  
Thanks for your philosophical container you're holding for us here on this question. And mission is we're currently building framework for decentralized settings. And one of the big things we're developing is a new API for social graph architecture that allows users to and people just see a feedback of themselves and their belief constructs and systems through the AI rather than the fed a single feed that falls into words comfortable to you. And in that way, we're looking at what data do we need to be back to users to see a mirror of their own views and how to be used This video allow the system to do it via, you know, populate indeed and relational data, or we allow some user centric decentralized kind of tag. Cool. How would you approach something like that?

Zak 55:15  
Yeah, great question. Because there's a lot of these kinds of things kind of emerging. And so, I'm of the school that believes you should always put the measurement tools in the users hands. I don't think that it should come from behind the curtain like today. You're like, we did this magical stuff back here. And then to like, that's not really the right approach. You need to let them see how it works. And as much as possible, let them actually configure and play with the assessment themselves. And it's good for two reasons. One is that you'll end up with a better assessment system, because mine's better than 100 or whatever your team sizes. And the other one is that empowers, as opposed to alliances. So again, any measurement instances is it's actually a political relationship of power. It's not a scientific relationship of objective. It's not immoral or non relationship that's just two people hanging out. Not that it is a always a political or ethical religion to think that way and what if it's on the street and I was approaching this guy, what would I do? I'd probably like put a table between us and show him what I was going to do to him first.
Ancient, not ancient and medieval Poland. If you were to measure someone was like a hex. You weren't allowed to measure people. And in fact, sometimes doctors would come in when you're sick and all they would do was measure and people get better. Sometimes, obviously, they're probably done most of the time. But nature is very vague, which is that as much as possible, empower the person who's being measured. They're being measured, and actually to be able to augment the measure. So it's like, if you have a mirror, and you want to be able to clean the mirror, I want to get this angle, I want to get that angle, you know what I mean? So the Can you turn the mirror around to get that magnifying mirror? Oh, but he turned back because you don't actually don't want the nightmare. Like you want to have that capability for them. And then they feel like they're not some test subject. And they're not subject to some magical assessment. They don't understand. In fact, they see what's going on, and it's part of their toolkit. And so that that would be in general, my response.

Int 57:54  
I think there is a potential to do what you're doing in a way that's quite bad for people because for example, The AI comes back and gives them some worldview that kind of doesn't really fit with what they thought about themselves. That's weird. Who do I believe?

Zak 58:10  
Right? The magical AI, who was designed by all these fancy people with all this money, and I don't know how it works, and but it says that, you know, like, how was that big red like you actually a nihilist? Like, who do you believe, like the dilemma, you want them to know how this assessment works so that when they get the results, I get this, this makes sense. And so that means also a general thing is that as much as possible, you want constructive responses, not selected response. Right. And constructive response shouldn't be confused with just semantic coating free writing, necessarily a constructive response. What is the deeper question so psychometric. So just because you're tracking when someone writes doesn't mean that you've given them actually a selected response items to work. Of course, multiple choice we all know is bad, although a lot of people still use. But many forms of semantic analysis are just a really complicated multiple choice question. They just invisible. And they're filling in the bubbles by writing certain words. They just don't realize that truly constructive response is one that looks at the argumentation and the reason. It's actually much harder to do with artificial intelligence, if not impossible.
So what that means is that, again, about uniqueness, right? How many world views you got, is I got an endless variety of world views. And so the question is, what is the classification scheme that's ultimately being produced? And does the classification scheme allow for the representation of uniqueness, which is to say that every person who took it could Getting different score. Not every person who takes it, it gets class into one of eight categories, one of 20, or one of 101 of 1000. Each person gets a different score. And again, you can do this if you're doing complex measuring over time, right? Every tree in my backyard, I tracked it with enough instruments would show up differently. Period, every humans the same way. So if you're coming short of that, and you're building the measure for some specific instrumental reason, you have to think about why you're doing so that's my other like, hard stop with all project is like, there's a conceptual issue with the idea of worldview. And that you could put me in a worldview, man. Like, try it. Like, it's a fancy artificial intelligence, but do we really want to start telling people that they fit in one of 10 or one of 20? I don't know. That's an open floor. topical question that a philosopher of education spent a long time worrying about which people are going in and doing just great. But again, this is unprecedented territory. We've never had a machine that told us things about ourselves, we didn't know about ourselves. We choose to do that. Eventually, the computational stack could become some kind of artificial intelligence, demigod that knows us better than we know ourselves. And we trusted and it measures that every aspect of our lives and it tells us what we need to do next. And there are people who actually kind of liked this idea.
Again, so already, it's already been happening when you look at the Facebook social graph here so but you know that Facebook for example, you know, bringing up the big road is using a ton of data, but every time we have a like an emotion, something we're angry about something based on our emotional reaction and based on the relevance of the relationship is born. perspective on VR, we'll see what we think what we're feeling like it's over the system. So that becomes transparent, that information becomes transparent, further funneling you into a real view. It's just showing you the backend these these are the things that you've been interested in. This is kind of the map of your meta data that you have populated in Houston was that each person is going to be unique and different, but I think it'll be a tool to help people see more clarity what they're thinking receiving was just amazing. I mean, since I'm not physically in the room with you, it's easy for me to be honest. I think it's too late for Facebook. That's like corrupt, ancient regime and the French.
Like all that shit we're using to surveil you and exploit you And all that stuff now you can use. These are the masters tools man, like they were used to exploit and to trick and to commodify. And to surveil and to manipulate without consent. And the idea that we can now now we have access to them now, it's all cool guys. Not at all. Not at all. I don't know what's to be done. In fact, like I said, it's an unprecedented situation. And I don't think, again, we have the tools to deal with a lot of the ethical problems that we face as a society. And this is wonderful. And, yeah, so again, I think some kind of open platform egalitarianism that allows people to build something like Facebook might be interesting. The question of whether people are even interested now because the damage has been done, and they'd rather just stick with Facebook and make do sounds a lot like what we've been doing with capitalism for the past 3040 years. So I don't think there's much time left. And so I actively work to tell people to get off Facebook. So I encourage you to do that for exactly the reasons that I've just been discussing. So, you know, the idea of fixing it is like the idea of fixing the public schools to me, it's like now, you know, we need to something profoundly different, something profoundly new. 
And measurement as part of the reason why. So, it's not me, it's not. So I have to answer, I think, actually, in fact, the possibility of pivoting towards some type of infrastructure that has many the affordances of Facebook, even psychometrically for self reflection, is huge. So one way of thinking about it is like the nuclear power plant that came from the Manhattan Project, right, the bad guys built all of us stuff. But there are humane uses for it. Right? But we have to take it off the military base and literally with Facebook military base and bring it to a place where the citizens can look at what's available. Some find some kind of agreement about how to use this incredibly powerful for relationship and measurement. And again, so it may be that we decided that we don't want to do something like this again, after the end, again, predicting not a happy future. If the state of the internet and the informational ego system remains as it is, the asymmetric informational environments alone, coupled with economic inequality, or share massive unrest.
It's not just that they're richer, it's that they're smarter and they know stuff about us that we don't even know.

Int 1:05:58  
Yeah, that's too bad.

Zak 1:06:02
And so, yeah, so I think an alternative one needs to start to be being built, not work within the old one, but start to really start to build something different and people will flock to it. You know, Bucky Fuller, you have to build the alternative. So that would be my senses from whole from scratch. You know, with lessons learned, again, we were the stupidest possible species to build a social networking site. We're not that species anymore.
Right. We can learn a lesson. So I'm getting the body language to stop talking. Thank you, guys.