Unknown Speaker  0:00  
No, this is Mark beneteau from the circling guy podcast, and we have a very special show for you today because I have with me, my friend and partners Darrell Duane, and David sweat law.

Unknown Speaker  0:11  
So you guys want to wave to the crowd denies is Darryl Duane.

Unknown Speaker  0:15  
Hi, this is David sweat.

Unknown Speaker  0:16  
Okay. Okay guys. So Darryl runs an intentional community in Washington DC called the glow House of which I am currently a very happy resident. Darryl was trained in Boulder integral teak recycling program and with a minimum Cisco Boulder. Your team in San Francisco? Yeah, in a degree Okay, got it. Um, it will take me many minutes to list those various projects and interests. I'll just to name two of them. He runs a very large Burning Man community called Camp contact, which includes both dance equity yoga and authentic relating components. And he's also creating community around universal basic income on the blockchain through a site of his called crypto ubi.org. And David swin law is a certified facilitator with several new He's presented at the world future society, South by Southwest Interactive and the American creativity Association. David is committed to co creating effective practices of interdependent human thriving. I love that David. So it's a great pleasure to be with you both today. So here's what brings us together. So all three of us have been very impacted by a recent podcast by Zachary Stein, who is a writer and futurist on his recent article, which is called love in a time between worlds on the meta modern return to a metaphysics of Eros. The full article was published in the integral review, and is also available on Zach's website. And Zach Stein was recently interviewed by Michael Garfield on the tutor fossils podcast, Episode Number 97, which is truly wonderful podcast that I actually became a Patreon supporter of Michael Garfield after listening to this episode. I was so impressed and plus. Michael needs the money Yes, he is becoming a father. Soon, so we do want to support them do not fall.

Unknown Speaker  2:03  
Absolutely.

Unknown Speaker  2:05  
Okay, good. So I'm going to start us off with this nine minute clip of Zach Stein on the future fossils podcast, which I'm sharing with Michael's permission, of course. Now I was going to go today is I'm gonna start with the audio clip. And then Darrell, David and I are going to check in and do what's called topical circling, which basically means we're going to share ideas and impact and riff off each other as it were. And for those of you who aren't familiar with the idea of a topical Circle Circle, it is simply a circle in which we allow more latitude for the sharing of intellectual content and ideas than we do in a regular or strict relational meditation circle, while still holding connection intent as primary as we do in regular circle. Meaning we're sharing ideas but also emotional impact and hopefully valuing our connection through this process. So let me kick it off with Zach Stein. He's describing an emerging philosophy called meta modernism. Which is both a philosophy and a movement, which we believe has significant implications on the practice of circling. And we'll do this live at a time between worlds and the time in which the deepest questions about what it means to be human are kind of on the table again, it's like there are neuroscientists seriously suggesting we don't have free will. And arguing we can like change the legal system, which is predicated upon free will, by the way, like we can change the legal system, we can change the legal system to say that there is no free will like serious suggestions and also of course, Does God Exist? Is there an afterlife is there reincarnation, the nature of illness, nature, healing, all of these things are scattered in this kind of Post truth, cultural desert where you're not sure which ones you know a thriving Oasis and which one's a you know, basically a mirage and And part of that's due to the internet. 
And I talked about the kind of structural way that the Post truth culture has been generated by the very logic of communication technology. But it's also a moment properly speaking in the evolution of culture, which is to say it's a rightful overcoming of the singular logic and logo, centrism and Mondo centrism of mcgahren today. And so the postmodern proliferation of perspectives and the and the concomitant confusion is is par for the course. But it's of course, a dangerous critical global path through the confusion back to reality. And so I talked about a return to arrows, and a return to a metaphysics in which not just physical things are real, but also the things that populate the human interiors and especially the constellation of emotions around love, that these things are as real Any of the physical properties and so this gets to again, the nature of reality and the need to have it more nuanced metaphysics that doesn't just materiality and meaningless matter in motion and Darwinian dynamics, but that includes meaning value, interiority is consciousness, etc. Right? Totally. So, yeah, absolutely. 
I'm in the framing of the papers in terms of the cultural epoch or kind of historical period ization, right, which is so you can slice history into, you know, the history is is very complicated stream, you can slice it into periods or a box. And so there's a group that is, you know, mostly in kind of Europe, and there, there's some American representatives who have kind of dubbed the emerging period of history that we are entering as metamodel. And I think it's an important conversation. Because I was convinced long ago by Hamas and others that what we call post modernism is actually most of the traits of modernity, just with the volume turned really way up like his subjects you know, subjectivity increases, you know, contextualization and increases, instead of one perspective, you get many perspectives, not the pre perspectival, pre modern, where the individual in the group refused, but this hyper individualism flourishes more under post monitors. 
So, this idea that there must be a cultural turning in which we can critique both the postmodern and the modern, and we can value both the postmodern and the modern, which is to say there's something that's distinctly non modern or meta modern, which will get a name later. We're not sure what it will be. That's the way I hold it then. And integral theory which I discovered very young, like, in my 20s, like I was 20, literally, when I read in psychology, spirituality You know, this was, I see this now as a species of meta modern philosophy. And there were many varieties of meta modern philosophy. Not all of them are integral theory. Intro theory is one that I started with him like a lot. But there are other candidates metamodel modern, you know, meta modern worldviews. And so we know, one of the things that makes a cultural period, a period is that there's some coherence to the structure of it. And so this list you talked about in the beginning of my paper, it's it's a list of the things that kind of characterize the meta modern historical periods view of reality and science and it's distinctly different from the postmodern in the modern, right. So the modern view of science is that science is truth period. Like other periods, very definite. The postmodern view of science is like science is one view dot, dot, dot, right? 
Like there's actually many And sciences one, the metamodel view essentially tries to say that both of those are true. And as you were saying with them specific context, science works and actually discovers things. The problem is that it overstepped its context. And so it takes, for example, an experiment that was done in a very closed condition in the laboratory, and pretends that what's discovered to air applies to radically open systems outside the laboratory pharmaceuticals in the drinking water, because we're cisely push this thing through that's and that's a perfect example, you know, and that's exactly the danger of the modern view, which is correct in the laboratory guys, like don't take me so the postmodern seize that moment of error in the modern and then wants to throw science out the window completely. The amount of modernist says, hold on something happened in the laboratory. Like we have to actually pay attention to the moment of truth in the modern and then, you know, contextualize it with the postmodern, you know, alternative, which says, Well Let's do a bunch of other experiments, let's do things that don't even look like experiments, right? And let's look at methodologies that are non quantitative and methodologies that are phenomenological purely subjective, which a modernist would never even touch. So you get this proliferation of methods, proliferation of perspectives, all good, but now with total fragmentation, and like out of the academy cones, totally confusing gobbledygook about what is the nature of the human.

Unknown Speaker  9:28  
But, you know, I listen to that recording at least a half a dozen times, and every time it kind of moves me and excites me. It's very powerful. Yeah. So David, why don't you kick us off with your impact on that, and if anything else that's up for you, by the way, we're not limiting this conversation in any way.

David 9:46  
Thank you. Um, you know, I first just want to say, you know, thank you guys. I've been listening to Michael Garko for a while but this this conversation, I'm excited that it's that it stirred up more people as well. And it really does. It, there's a vibrancy that Zach Stein brings to the conversation that I think has been missing up till now. You know, I like both of you. I've been studying Wilbur for a while and actually participated in some of his courses back in 2005. And I've had this sense that that there is some way to bring all of this to a more ideal way that we can relate to each other. I mean, my whole my whole thing of wanting to have a well, I'll say I was impacted as well by Buckminster Fuller, and that whole sense that we want to we want a world that works for everyone. And there's a way that that has always felt a little bit theoretical and too far off. And there's a frustration around that. And, and even with participating with Wilbur and everything else, there's just this way in which it feels like it's we can't seem to get the grounded root of how do we get started on that.

Unknown Speaker  10:59  
That's in as it heads on sticks, yes, yes. And so my experience was circling was a way for me, my introduction to it came at an intuition of saying, I think there's something my body has to contribute to the conversation, but I don't know how to hear. And actually slowing down enough to listen to myself while I was relating to others, profoundly shifted the way that I listened. And it's inaccurate three years of practice, I find that I'm continuing to deepen in that. And so it's really this powerful way that I can see connecting to others really requires a deep connecting to myself first. What was powerful in listening to Zack Stein's interview with with Michael Garfield was the recognition that we're doing that now that we feel like suddenly we have a collective way of doing that, like the need to get to a place point of being able to hear what it is that we as a collective, what we want as a species is a deep way of it's like, in this moment, I mean, it makes so much sense that we're in a Post truth era. And from where we have been so far, it's like if we could just establish the ground rules for how to interact with one another, then we get going. 
And it's like, We're finally at the point, I feel like we're finally at the point where that's no longer That's no longer the goal. Giving up on the notion of what are the essential ground rules to get started. All we need to do is start with where we're at. All we need to do is start with right here. And so that's where I'm super excited to see what arises when we actually just meet each other. Meet myself. Look in the mirror very clearly and say Here's where we're at today, but that's beautiful. And what I'm, what I'm resonating with is slow down long enough to notice what's going on within you. And that's all we need to do. So let's just, let's just put that into the space and let it simmer for a bit. Okay. Thank you. Yes. Cool.

Unknown Speaker  13:28  
What are your thoughts though?

Unknown Speaker  13:29  
Yeah. So I think you touched on some great, great stuff there, David, particularly the embodiment part and listening to our bodies and not knowing how to interpret what our bodies are saying. I've recently or have had ongoing also had a frustration with language. And there's this idea that language and has so much power, but I think a lot of people give it too much credence and then some other people's enough credence. I was very interested to hear about this book you mentioned, something about the alphabet and the body. David you mentioned the alphabet versus the goddess by great Jeff, am I reading lists now? And I wanted to contrast the intellectual aspects of Bucky and and Wilbur with with also wanting to get embodied what is the embodied? What Mr. Fuller look like for us? How can Ken Wilber get more embodied? And maybe that's what Zach is kind of able to reach here in this and certainly what I'm wanting no matter what we do but I think there's a lot to be said for kind of thinking about Haha, like that. Just that question "How does anybody any given interaction, get what they want? And how are we creating more than Win win?" Win for you, win for me, and win for the rest of the world.

Unknown Speaker  15:01  
In each your interactions and yeah, if that but that's the complex, then, and we're enable we're going to a place where we're able to have technology and spirit and, and human connection and awareness of our bodies enough that it's possible, plausible. And I'm hopeful that this has made what Zach is saying when he's talking about kind of this new, new return to metaphysics. There's some, some new, like, I get deeper in his podcast, I think he said something about or when we mentioned this, that there's this in post modernism, everything's okay. Or everything is what it is. People are just who they are. And they are, and we still have that yet there is some unifying sense of the human or of Venus and a while ago, I was wondering What would the human mission statement be? Or what would the earth mission statement be getting to like a Gaia hypothesis? sort of thinking and what if everybody knew what that was or was able to interact with it at some level in each of the decisions that we make day to day to to co creates consciousness and an activity that is here now you know that was very inspiring for me as well as sort of this idea of a triple win me me you in the world of that so so I guess here's what I want to say. 
So listening to Zack Snyder made me feel less alone in that I can see now that I'm part of this movement which he calls meta modernism, and which I like and essentially could be planetary versions of integral to your consciousness as an integral theory, including transcend of left and right politics right in This is a worldview that I feel has quite profound implications to the theory in practice of circling. So this is what we're going to talk about most is a circling podcast. So I'm developing two platforms just very briefly. One is the circling guide in which I'm basically trying to educate and inspire people to learn about and practice circling. And not just in formal circles but also with their loved ones and business partner is a practice that I call it my book guerrilla circling as in guerrilla warfare of the underground love Revolutionary Army. Haha. I was giving the thumbs up here. And my other platform is the man woman education platform. And I could say a lot more about history was certainly in my ongoing love affair with the practice of circling and with a circle and community. But let's, let's get back to metamodels philosophy here and its implications. So, from my perspective, it anzacs it really helped me to see this is circling to me as a very precise and very powerful application or many instances Son of this meta modern philosophy into the field of human loving, of the fundamental challenge of learning how to love and be loved, including all the obstacles that are putting away, which of course include developmental trauma and our social condition. 
And what I am really trying to do in my life, is to bring this question of love back into the public conversation, but in a practical way, which I think that is doing. And this is really what has me so excited. I mean, it's very intellectual, but it also really resonates with me in a lot of fundamental ways. And this is, this is why I'm so excited about circling because I believe that certainly is perhaps the fastest and most direct way of becoming a more loving person or learning those skills, and becoming a more whole and more complex and more generous, more interrelated and happier person. 
And I think you'll excel and I think you guys know, I'm a circle circling groupie, and you guys are not very far behind, particularly David. Yes, so I'll just give one frame here and then I'll just move to the topical circle of the frame which is meaningful to me which illustrates the nature of circling as a integral or meta modern practice. And so I will name one of the core principles of circling which is welcome everything, welcome everything right. But for me, for this to work, it needs to be a very active welcome up welcome everything. So it needs to be done within a relational container, in which we truly attempt to understand in Connect, and connect with with what the other is bringing. So this would be in contrast, for instance, to a postmodern approach, such as Fritz perls, famous quote, you do your thing, and I do mind and if we meet, it's beautiful. 
And if we don't do bad, right, so it sounds good, but somehow to me that doesn't satisfy because it doesn't actually speak of our deep human need to connect and to relate to each other to our differences and to find common ground and our shared humanity, which is really what it uses, which is really where the Julius So I think let me just put that into the space and see where we want to go from here. I know you, David, you were relating a very powerful experience you had earlier, it was a project with Hazel grace in Austin. I don't know if you want to see more about that. Or Yeah, actually, I would, I would love to because I think it speaks really powerfully to what, what we're talking about here. And it's really starting to see how this authentic relating movement is starting to bring to the fore practices that that dude touch deeply into that arrows. The thing that I would say, you know, just introducing that. And hearing you Marco, the thing that really stands out to me, is this conversation is like, I feel like we're ready to really get started having this conversation. Because I'm finally able to listen to myself. It's like I'm no longer requiring that you be some certain way. Way, before I engage in the conversation, I actually can be in a relationship with myself in a way that brings me forward. And now I'm actually available to have the conversation that said, the the, the, the, the course that I took with his graduates is, is called healing the divide. 
It was born out of our bedside, the COC project and the pissy project put together as men and women actually healing the shame around sexuality. And while I am aware of my own sense of shame around sexuality, I had no idea how central that was to the difficulty I find that connecting to other people. And as I the day is a the course is really a day of men for speaking and women witnessing women then speaking and men witnessing with specific questions and a specific questions, you know, guide me to a deeper experience of what, what is my actual authentic experience of myself as I have grown up through this way in which I orient to my sexuality. The thing that moved with me the most about it was opening myself up. And giving, having been given the opportunity to speak first had to be to really delve into my experience of my sexuality with other men opened me up in some profound ways, my heart space just expanded. And from that place actually moving into witnessing the women. I just noticed how powerful and distinct the experiences are that listening, and I was able to hear myself the hearing new subtle nuances of ways in which I wanted to listen to myself and it's This really powerful is just how much that that I crave that I mean it satisfied some deep yearning inside of me that that just brought tears to my eyes. It just allowed me to actually hear what it was that I wanted from connection and it's brought tears to my eyes. Even when you first spoke about this and what I'm hearing is some the women speaking it's coming to me now actually the grief is that the women speaking reflected something inside you that you found a listening for.

Unknown Speaker  23:39  
Yes, yeah, absolutely. Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  23:45  
Yeah, that's beautiful.

Unknown Speaker  23:46  
Yeah, I don't know if it captures it. But the sense is, if you will, but listen to me. We can really dance right? Which is what they want. Right? Right. That's essentially it.

Unknown Speaker  24:03  
Yes. Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  24:06  
And the challenge there is, is us opening to that request and then making the request and then making the request in a way that's actually enrolling. Right?

Unknown Speaker  24:16  
Right.

Unknown Speaker  24:18  
And there my own personal practice has been, I'm actually hearing parts of myself make the same request. You know, I am I'm aware that I've been attempting to solve this problem from an intellectual space. It's circling has given me a capacity for listening deeper than that. And now that I you know, what i what i, the way that I frame it is, I'm actually looking for authentic partnership between my heart and my brain.

Unknown Speaker  24:53  
Feels really soothing. Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  24:58  
Yeah. Yeah, you haven't Thought, the impact at the moment sounds. The chakra framework really resonates for me in this. And I think a lot most of our life's mission as humans is to integrate the connections between each of our chakras nebulous, easy ways you're gonna get it, where do we, where's the next step in that or how are we able to better know I have this fantasy of little chakra watch that tells us how we're doing nice glowing stuff. Maybe someday we have better awarenesses of that that can be measured and shown. And coached as we as we co create. And until we do, we have circling as the tool to get real and and let those withholds become not withholding.

Unknown Speaker  26:05  
That's, that's really as beautiful. It It reminds me you know, just in saying that while the practice has been How can I have authentic partnership between my heart and my, in my mind, you know, some sense my third eye in my heart chakra. Okay. There's another part that the workshop with his associates did with me yesterday which is including the second chakra noticing the way in which that subtle, challenging and really what what you're saying with that really excites me from the perspective noticing the interplay of all of the all of the Shockers as I'm going and in some way the I'm curious if there's some way to do a topical sock circling of the different chakras, there's really a way to have including that. That I think is a powerful way Opening myself up to myself into, into into the world. Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  27:06  
So yeah, so I mean, we we sort of start with that sign in sign and then we, we seem to be, you know, moving to the topic of the masculine feminine split, you know, heart and head. And if you're on me, I will introduce another friend here is always spoken to me quite powerfully then this is when the Course in Miracles and nobody's field alone, nobody feels alone, right? I think why this speaks to me so powerfully, is it's just the recognition that we do not exist in a vacuum, that we're deeply impacted by the social conditioning and the moons and emotional conditions of the people in our environment, right. And so contrast this to a postmodern idea that we all create our own reality for example, you know, subtext, you and you alone are responsible for your healing and transformation. That's the subsets of you create your own reality, which of course is true You know, we obviously we do create on reality. We have choice how we respond to people and events and so forth. And we're also, you know, we also have to respond creatively to the challenges arising out of our, you know, character ology, and traumas and so forth. However, the idea that we create our own reality is a vast oversimplification of the truth about humanity. And it can actually be damaging, you can be damaging because we can take this idea that we create our own reality, first of all, and use it to guilt and shame ourselves, right, when we're seemingly failing to create a reality that we like, right. Um, and it can also lead to a kind of hyper individualism in which we can imagine we can solve our problems by ourselves by some, you know, new and improved structure of life one way, which in most cases is, is false. That's not going to happen. You know, in most cases, the most direct way to solve our problems is to start showing up to ourselves and other people with more honesty and vulnerability. Okay, Nicole, this you know, I call this communicating truth with care and care with truth. And you know, David, when you talk about slowing down to listen to yourself, that, that reminds me of this.

Unknown Speaker  29:14  
Thank you. Yeah, that's really powerful.

Unknown Speaker  29:19  
I love I love that, that observation that just from a postmodern perspective, we create our own reality is, is a way in which disconnecting from it's a way that can be used to disconnect from myself, and it can be a victim blaming, and I'm independent. I don't need you and all you know, since you're creating your own rally to stop fucking it up, and then let's get let's actually just connect right so both of those have a way of dexa Good thing thing is this, this actually speaks Marco, you know, and I, you know, I've talked about that idea, this concept that I that I have the opposable self.

Unknown Speaker  29:57  
Yes, yes, talk about that.

Unknown Speaker  29:58  
It's beautifully said That that sense of the opposable self like an opposable thumb are distinct perspectives that come together and if I'm not aware of the connection it comes across as opposition ality of either or thinking in which there's a there's a sense of head butting and fighting over the truth. And from the point of contact where the you know, if I imagined where my fingers and thumb touch that, from that opposition ality if there's a fight, actually can't get the sense of your perspective, because I'm starting my perspective so much. But the real sense of it is the dance happens whenever I find our commonality, I really the union at the other end, which is really deep within myself. So the deep sense of where I'm actually connected to myself is specifically the point that feels most challenged in that oppositional perspective and when I can be with myself there suddenly something opens up and something shifts and I can hear myself and hear you newly in the dance really becomes possible.

Unknown Speaker  31:08  
Right, right. So back to the you know, just to reiterate the idea of the opposable opposable brain, our brains are designed to be opposable so that the two parts can get into connection and reach higher integration. Yes.

Unknown Speaker  31:23  
Right. Right. And, and when they're just off, there's a sense of dissonance. And actually, it's the dissonance if I'm listening closely to the dissonance, and how the dissonance impacts me, rather than trying to fix the dissonance, actually can become in harmony, just from noticing the point of impact. Sweet. Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  31:48  
That was an Adele.

Unknown Speaker  31:51  
Yeah, I hear you.

Unknown Speaker  31:56  
Yes, reminds me of the subject object dilemma.

Unknown Speaker  32:00  
Yes.

Unknown Speaker  32:02  
Right, the subject doesn't shift. Yeah, I talked about that a lot as well.

Unknown Speaker  32:06  
There's another there's another aspect of this, which there's a there's a way in which what you were saying before that freedom of choice that exact science speaks to this as well, right? There's a, we're starting to get to a point where free will is actually brought into question.

Unknown Speaker  32:23  
Yeah, I love that, that the idea that the legal system is totally based on the existence of free will. But yet, there's now this idea and I wanted to learn more about it, that that maybe we can't count on freewill and holding people accountable.

Unknown Speaker  32:42  
Right. Well, then that so and I've wrestled with this myself so many times. What I notice here that's interesting is, as I look at it, it looks like where I have freedom is in choosing the context with which I'm interpreting the frame. You know what this conversation is about. So the impact, the impact actually can shift, right? What happened happened, what's in the room is in the room, but I can actually listen from different perspectives and settled into myself. So the point of a possibility, in a way, can shift in a way that opens up the conversation. And it's specifically for me being attached to one specific perspective that makes that hard to do. But when I noticed I can relax the attachment to one perspective. I then can allow other perspectives to arise and free myself from that from that frame.

Unknown Speaker  33:45  
For me, real truth is paradox. I don't believe something until I find some contradiction to it or some anti truth to it. I don't think Real Truth is just a simple statement. So if the sky is blue, and when they and I think that's exactly what looks like, then the exact Stein is saying, you know, real truth is extraordinarily complex and both modernism and post modernism, you know, are making a make a farce, of the job of actually finding real true, right. So, you know, I think my, my thought on this guy's is, I actually pretty firmly believe that we have much less free will. And then we imagine because we're just basically, you know, controlled by both social conditioning and by what's it called picking up is your physiological patterns, you know, obsessive brain loops, physiological loops, etc, addictions.

Unknown Speaker  34:46  
Third, the third new thing is, is our gut enzyme or our gut. Yes, yes. Why?

Unknown Speaker  34:52  
What's it called the brain stomach, blink, that there's a lot of research and discovery be made about that.

Unknown Speaker  34:57  
There's all these other other like, we I almost have a second brain, we almost have a second brain and digestive system. It's actually it's not a brain. It's a collection of microorganisms.

Unknown Speaker  35:07  
Right, exactly.

Unknown Speaker  35:10  
Yeah. So So anyway, um, but this reverts back to what you were saying, David is that you know, even even if it's only true that we have 10% of the Free Will we want by gaining awareness of those areas where that may be true, paradoxically, it gives us more free will. Absolutely like, and I mean, it will certainly give us more peace and happiness and relaxation, because we are not pitting ourselves for being the way we are. Right. Right. Right. You know, you know, I've been, you know, I've been trying for 30 years to do an hour of yoga, one awakening, and I haven't succeeded yet. But I still hope to reach that state one day, in fact, might start tomorrow. Who knows? Why not?

Unknown Speaker  35:56  
Yeah, it's so absolutely. That's that's exactly what Right, that sense that by actually naming that point, it feels like I mean, the thing that's amazing is it's I almost want to fight against the idea that I don't have free will.

Unknown Speaker  36:12  
I want to I want to, you know, it reminds me of

Unknown Speaker  36:16  
in the in the matrix movie when Morpheus asks Neo, do you want to be in control of your life in it? Do you want this up? There's a sense that, yes, I know what you mean, I know that feeling that you're out of control is almost untenable that you don't have some say in, in your experience. And if if I'm not actually willing to look there, then I'm then I am at the effect of my circumstance. Exactly. If you're not even willing to contemplate the question, you're automatically a victim of that question. Right?

Unknown Speaker  36:52  
Right. It's beautiful. I should watch that movie again. Actually.

Unknown Speaker  36:56  
It's powerful when it really is. No, it's not. That movie really did something. So it's a psychologically very, very brilliant movie.

Unknown Speaker  37:08  
There's, I want to bring it back to an earlier conversation about this idea of the cult. I want to miss.

Unknown Speaker  37:16  
Yes. And let's wrap it up with that if we could because Okay, we got some good content here.

Unknown Speaker  37:22  
So part of where this comes to mind. I mean it's in in my mind all the time when I think about intentional community and utopian visions. I'm aware that there's something that's that's unaddressed and that there's something that seems to go sideways almost every time and in particular, they just recently I've been watching the mini series on Netflix for wild wild country where Osho or tree Rajneesh has been, you know, it's such It was so sideways. Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  37:54  
And I watched that I watched that for six hours straight By the way, David. Can I powerful I think I ended up at 4am.

Unknown Speaker  38:02  
Wow, that's pretty. It's a it's deeply powerful and impacting just to watch from both sides, right? The thing that's so amazing is watching the way in which both the Russian issues and the Oregonians were willing to Fort their values in order to get to some perceived some perceived need met and completely obliterating both of their truths, the state of drugs in order to get to that, right. And, and so the question for me is how, how do we be aware of that, so that that doesn't sneak up? And I mean, it's so so interesting. You it's clearly a point where they're not acting from free will. Right. And so the question for me is, how do we start this conversation in a way that doesn't lead to that Same kind of self delusional, chasing myself down that rabbit hole and losing the the essence of what it is that I'm really after.

Unknown Speaker  39:13  
Yeah, and that's sort of the the topic of really what we're trying we're trying to achieve, you know, top of the sensible brain and holding up two perspectives simultaneously.

Unknown Speaker  39:22  
So the shift we made the conversation here is about taking that free will part to the community. And what point does the community take away free will from its members through cultish or influence or culture of that community? And at what point are people yeah, wait and I'm extremely happy that your name that Daryl is you are, you know, the official leader of the camp contacts cult.

Unknown Speaker  39:55  
Sure, sure as it were. I don't under I worked very hard and asked myself constantly, how does this community of dancers and and people going to Burning Man festivals?

Unknown Speaker  40:11  
Exercise its free will.

Unknown Speaker  40:15  
And we're not democratic, we don't use a democratic model.

Unknown Speaker  40:20  
We don't use consensus per se.

Unknown Speaker  40:25  
And and the other part of that question is how can we make it most efficient to have people do that? And so there's, there's things like democracy and how does just distributed leadership happen or collaborative leadership happen? Things like holacracy and socio cracy come to mind. But I'm not sure those are suitable for that either all the way but there might be some parts of it that can come and then how does this expand out and to the rest of society? Which leads me back to that that question What is the biological based mission statement? What What is? What are all of our organisms trying to do day in day out? And how can we make it more efficient or more practical and not waste people's energies are people going off in different directions that that don't serve that that greater mission and you know what they're like, I gotta give you a big shout out a big appreciation for you know, for the work you do at Camp contact. No one is getting paid here. In fact, you're losing money at this contribute, right? I lost different ways. Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  41:42  
And you know, basically bringing you know bringing together you know, quite large group of people in in a collaborative venture that includes, you know, all the logistical support and programming for you know, bringing manickam contacts and all the all the different digital burns that that you do that we do and really trying to optimize The transformational value and the you know, that's a very, very complex bubble. How do we keep this thing going with, you know, some kind of reasonable level of chaos? Yeah, that doesn't overwhelm and operates at least as efficiently as we can, while at the same time maximizing, you know, people's contributions. Right. Right. And this is, and this is a problem that I know you think about every day and maybe every minute of the day. Right? Sure. And sometimes you screw up and I've seen you suffer when you screw up. Yeah, yeah.

Unknown Speaker  42:40  
Go ahead, David.

Unknown Speaker  42:41  
I'd like to say as well, you know, this uh, this year, Burning Man was the first my first interaction with camp contact. And there are two things that come to mind. Really one of them is it truly is the art of emergence. relational, thriving, right? Just this beautiful way and Which search the whole comes together. And in your presence is so subtle from the, from the, from a governance perspective, right? You're almost invisible from a governance perspective. But as I watch what you're doing so beautifully weaving the pieces together, and kind of listening for that conversation that allows people to step forward, continually, and each person kind of recognizes, in a way, what do I feel is missing that I want to contribute to the space and that contributes to the whole it's just beautiful. So you know, I, I'm your mark, I really want to acknowledge you.

Unknown Speaker  43:45  
Thank you powerful concert. Really sweet words. And yeah, I'll take them in a little bit. And I also want to push my back at you. Okay, guys, so you saw something that you liked? What are you guys doing to do the same thing, somebody else? Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  44:00  
Perfect, accepted.

Unknown Speaker  44:04  
Cheers.

Unknown Speaker  44:05  
Okay now, okay guys, you know I'm feeling full. I'm feeling happy. I'm you know, I'm ready to to stop there. If there's any kind of burning things you guys want to do and then we'll move to debrief. I'm gonna record the debrief, but then we'll publish it depending on depending on what comes out. Okay.

Unknown Speaker  44:23  
Yeah. Thank you, Mark. Thank you, David. I think we're onto something powerful here and I look forward to future versions of this. Other top. Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  44:35  
Yeah, same here. Same here. Extremely thrilled. Yes.

Unknown Speaker  44:40  
Okay, Marco, maybe I've already checked out, just to say I'm happy and full. And you guys have anything, anything more.

Unknown Speaker  44:47  
I'll say.

Unknown Speaker  44:52  
I feel like in a real way, this is just barely scratching the surface, and yet it feels like a significant scratch. It feels Like a toehold into something very powerful to continue the conversation. So I'm excited. I'm excited about this moment in time and where we're at and kind of setting the context for continuing beyond now.

Unknown Speaker  45:16  
I think we're, I think we're sort of insignificant alignment about what we want to create and how we're going to do it. Which is pretty significant.
