It seems useful to spend some time on the notions of the “rivalrous,” the “non-rivalrous” and the “anti-rivalrous”.  Both in terms of getting to some clarity and specificity but what is meant with these ideas and in terms of getting some nuance on how to use them in life.


An initial distinction is that each of these three terms have meaning in two distinct senses: an interior/subjective sense and an exterior/objective sense.


Taken in the *subjective,* the “rivalrous” refers to a mind-set or a disposition that is biased towards “winning” in some kind of rivalrous game.  It is strategic.  While it can be cooperative - it cooperates only as part of a larger strategy that is careful to ensure that if / when it comes to win/lose, it is the one that wins.  By contrast the “non-rivalrous” refers to a mind-set or disposition that is biased towards sharing in and/or protecting some kind of non-rivalrous commons.  It is cooperative without a larger strategy - even to the point of self-harm.  In three-player repeated games, they might map to “saints”.  Within this context, there is an interesting disposition we might think of as the “protector rivalrous”.  Or “tit-for-tat” this disposition is in some sense default non-rivalrous but is sensitive to defection and will shift to a strong rivalrous (even to the extent to self-harm) disposition when it believes that it is in relationship with a rivalrous player.   There are likely many different variations on this kind of complex mixture - so nuanced is the tension between the rivalrous and the non-rivalrous.

From the subjective sense, the “anti-rivalrous” refers to a mind-set or disposition that is biased towards curiosity, exploration and collaboration.  It tends to be oblivious to or ineffective in rivalrous games.  It tends to be generative and creative in non-rivalrous games.  The anti-rivalrous disposition can’t really be understood without looking at the “objective” side of the coin. In a world that lives only on the continuum between actively rivalrous (things are really scarce right now) and potentially rivalrous (things are relatively plentiful right now), the anti-rivalrous doesn’t make much sense.  But this continuum isn’t the whole story.  There is an aspect of Reality that is intrinsically anti-rivalrous.

So - now to the objective side of the coin.


Taken from the “objective” sense, the rivalrous refers to phenomena in the world that both can be and are scarce.  If there are three of us and there is only enough water for one of us, that water is rivalrous.  One will drink and three will go thirsty (or, possibly, everyone will go thirsty- but only for a little while).  The non-rivalrous refers to a phenomenon that can be scarce - but isn’t (yet).  If there are three of us and plenty of water for all, the water is non-rivalrous.  Obviously, in this sense, the difference between rivalrous and non-rivalrous is contextual.  Add more people or lose some of the water and a once non-rivalrous thing can become rivalrous.  Subtract people or add water and a once rivalrous thing can become non-rivalrous.  This is important.  We might call this the “rivalrous continuum”.


By contrast, the anti-rivalrous is *intrinsically* not scarce.  It can not be scarce (although it can be non-existent or unevenly distributed and it can be made “scarce-like” more on that in a bit).  The very notion of “anti-rivalrous” is anti-rivalrous.  The idea can be shared among three people or three million people - and there is nothing about the sharing that dilutes or reduces its presence or value.  We can all “have” the idea without anyone losing anything (or, to be precise, without anyone losing anything except for the time and energy associated with rivalrous substrate necessary to communicate the anti-rivalrous).


Note that a rivalrous mind-set might object here that by “giving away” a valuable idea, I might be diluting its value.  But this is an error stemming from a long habit of living in and with a rivalrous mindset.  The rivalrous mindset sees everything through the rivalrous lens and, therefore, has a hard time conceiving of value that isn’t in terms of winning a rivalrous game.  While it is the case that I can use my exclusive awareness of an anti-rivalrous thing (like, say, an innovation in fusion energy that I just came up with) as leverage in a rivalrous strategy this doesn’t mean that the notion is rivalrous.  Only that it can be used as (or “rendered”) rivalrous.  


This is important.   As far as we can tell, in the context of the Real, the anti-rivalrous is always bounded by communication.  And communication is always bounded by some medium of communication - some rivalrous substrate (be that neurons, air, radiowaves, hard drive space, etc.).  Conceptually, it is important to decouple the essence of the anti-rivalrous from the (as far as we know) necessity of some rivalrous medium.  The process of ephemeralization is due to this decoupling.  I can move a given anti-rivalrous idea from a “heavy” medium (say engravings in a stone tablet) to a “light” medium (say photons on an LCD screen) without losing anything in the idea.  The idea is anti-rivalrous, communications can be rivalrous.

Close the communications and the anti-rivalrous can be used in rivalrous games.  Open the communications and you begin to find yourself in an anti-rivalrous game.  Moreover, the anti-rivalrous is the source of innovation and, hence, to moving the actually scarce to the potentially scarce (from rivalrous to non-rivalrous).   We can call this the “anti-rivalrous continuum”.    


So now we have a matrix of the subjective and objective senses of these three things and the notion of two continuua: [Rivalrous <-- Non-Rivalrous] [Anti-rivalrous:: Non-rivalrous <- Rivalrous]

The next step in the inquiry is to notice that the relationships among them aren’t simple.  For example, some might say that it is “better” to have a non-rivalrous disposition (“sharing is caring”).  However, if we truly find ourselves in a rivalrous competition over real and actual scarcity, a non-rivalrous disposition will simply “lose” and be extinguished from the game.  The reverse situation is much more subtle.  If the context is non-rivalrous, selecting a rivalrous disposition is a particular move - sometimes known in game theory as “defection” or becoming a “free rider”.  The problem here, of course, is that the rivalrous player in a non-rivalrous game will tend to convert the non-rivalrous game into a rivalrous game!  i.e., turning a context where everyone can win into one where at least some must lose.   If we select a meta-strategy that can state-switch from rivalrous to non-rivalrous, we will find a higher optimum (e.g., tit for tat).

If you have a default or ideological “rivalrous” mindset, this notion might land to you as simply “being smarter than everyone else” or “not being the sucker”.  If you have a default “non-rivalrous” mindset, the rivalrous mindset would land as “being an asshole”.  In any event, the foundational linkage between the rivalrous and non-rivalrous keeps these moves in constant play.  Hence the tragedy of the commons - in non-rivalrous games, non-rivalrous players need to constantly try to police rivalrous players or the game will for sure change to rivalrous (and, thence, to either a static rivalrous equilibrium or some sort of collapse depending on the relative power of the agents and the strength of the context).  


The situation of the anti-rivalrous (taken in the “objective” sense) is different.  The leverage/power of an anti-rivalrous disposition in the context of anti-rivalrous phenomenon can be extremely powerful.  This is a meta-game.  While, for example, keeping language restricted to an elite might seem like a good move in a rivalrous game, any group that allows language the be shared widely will roundly outcompete such a “language-limited” strategy.  

 

Thus: from the point of view of the rivalrous disposition, the anti-rivalrous aspect of the world is *THE* key to winning.  But this means trying to capture an anti-rivalrous disposition within a rivalrous meta-container.  I.e., get the scientists to cooperate, but always keep them dependent on funding.  By contrast, the anti-rivalrous can have the result of ameliorating scarcity and, therefore, rendering the rivalrous strategy the losing strategy.  From the anti-rivalrous point of view, the portion of the world that is on the Rivalrous continuum should be approached with a non-rivalrous disposition, supporting an anti-rivalrous disposition in the anti-rivalrous domain so as to generate a real movement of the rivalrous to the non-rivalrous.