PEPE'S METAPHYSICS
 The second part of the conversation between Dr. Jordan Peterson and Jonathan Page, recorded on November 7, 2016.
 Peterson: Let's talk about frogs! Pajo: That's right! [laughs]
 Pajo: Well, yes, huh ...
 I mean, when I saw the video,
 it seemed to be two days ago ... Peterson: Yes.
 Pajo: I couldn’t give faith!
 And the next morning I got a letter from my brother, he's also studying symbolism,
 and he is a very intelligent man, and he said:
 "Does Jordan know he embodies Pepe?"
 Peterson: Yes! And the funniest thing, you know,
 I knew about Pepe, but ...
 I definitely didn't think about it all when I was making the video,
 it never occurred to me that there was such a connection.
 I was more worried about this topic with Kermit,
 which jumped about two years ago.
 Pajo: [laughs] Peterson: Someone said then, and I thought, "Ha ..."
 and I went to listen to this Kermit, and thought:
 "Um, and the truth"
 Pajo: [laughs] Peterson: My voice is really similar to Kermit's.
 You know, I can make it lower,
 but my voice tends to rise into mine ... Pajo: Ha!
 Peterson: In my ... [confused]
 It’s all because of the tension.
 Pajo: [laughs out loud] Peterson: And ...
 Pajo: That's the thing! And now we are doing "Pepe's Metaphysics"!
 I don't think anyone has done that yet. Peterson: Yes, that's right, that's right.
 Pajo: [laughs] Peterson: You know,
 it's a weird coincidence too,
 also ... [confused]
 arose in connection with this mask,
 or the hat I wore. Pajo: Yes.
 She is very similar to Pepe. Peterson: I know! She even has
 red lips! It's just incredible! Pajo: Yes!
 Peterson: I almost fainted when I posted this video,
 and people began to point to a coincidence with Pepe.
 Seriously, I almost fainted. It happens to me infrequently.
 Pajo: [laughs]
 Peterson: I can only remember once
 in my life when I was so shocked I almost fainted.
 I thought it was too much for me.
 And then how to think about coincidences with frogs
 after that ...
 [confused] It's just ... well ...
 This is an indescribably absurd thing.
 Pajo: Yes. Peterson: So much of this has been indescribably absurd ...
 I don't even know what I wrote on Twitter yesterday ...
 I looked like "Value Maps," my book,
 placed on the Amazon list,
 just to inquire, and it was the eighth book
 in the list of books related to behaviorism.
 Pajo: Yes. Peterson: And she was surrounded by two books,
 Mazarin Banazhi's book is a woman,
 who invented the test for unconscious associations,
 used to find in a person some unconscious settings,
 Pajo: My God ... Peterson: And the second book is by Richard Bandler,
 which seems to have been called "Frogs and Princesses."
 Pajo: [laughs]
 Peterson: And then I learned about Keck,
 I didn't know anything about Keck, and ... [confused] Anyway, it's ...
 And today I thought when I watched Nina Paley,
 she’s just a genius, she made a cartoon
 of the plagues of God, which Moses sent upon Pharaoh,
 and one of them was barking frogs.
 Pajo: Yes. Peterson: And as a result ...
 Pajo: The result is a frog - the perfect liminal character,
 because the frog ... seems
 you also did a tweet about it, the frog lives
 and in the water, and on land, and so it ...
 she is like a demon because she can
 travel between different universes.
 And this can be seen in fairy tales,
 as, for example, "The Frog and the Princess" is a perfect example,
 there is also a connection with Pinocchio, we talked about this before.
 It turns out like - the princess goes to the pond, she plays with his
 favorite toy - with a golden ball, and she lets him in, he falls into the pond ...
 Peterson: Here we need to remember that
 the golden ball is also a snitch in "Harry Potter",
 which needs to be caught in Quidditch.
 And it's funny, because the snitch has a part of the soul of Val de Morta, huh?
 And it turns out that this is part of the soul of evil
 inside the golden ball. And this ball has wings,
 and it literally means “Shar Chaos”. Technically speaking, it is an alchemical symbol.
 The "Ball of Chaos" is a symbol of Mercury,
 and Mercury is the ambassador of the gods.
 As a result, the gods are talking to you,
 when something trembles in front of you and catches your attention.
 Pajo: Ugh. Peterson: And in Quidditch
 the person who follows what attracts attention,
 "Catcher", one who seeks a snitch,
 and it's also the one who wins not only in the game,
 but in the metagame too. Pajo: What is important to understand -
 the ball is the most significant thing. Peterson: Yes!
 That’s why it’s golden. He is like the sun.
 Pajo: It embodies the idea of ​​the most significant thing. And she loses the ball.
 He falls into the water and is out of there.
 She loses the most significant thing, and the thing falls into Chaos.
 Peterson: It’s like God’s death. Like a loss of value.
 Pajo: Yes! Or as the idea of ​​losing virtue.
 Or, you know, anything
 why you attach importance.
 And here is the frog,
 and the frog says, “I can bring back your ball,
 if you promise me something ... ". And this promise - the princess must promise,
 that will take the frog to his castle, and the frog will eat with it
 and also sleep with her in her bed, right?
 Peterson: Yes, that's right. Pajo: And here are these two things - food and sex.
 We’ve talked about this before. And so, the frog dives into the pond
 and returns this most significant thing.
 And the princess is forced to accept the ball and fulfill the promise.
 She doesn’t want to do it, she doesn’t want to at all
 let the frog to himself in the castle,
 giving to eat from her plate and sleep in her bed.
 But she does it - and the frog turns into a prince.
 Here it is, this is an idea we talked about earlier -
 the most significant thing disappears in Chaos,
 and what can bring her back -
 right? - what can bring her back,
 can be tamed, right?
 And can enter our world, find a place here. Peterson: Yes, that's right.
 And perhaps itself is gaining supreme importance.
 Pajo: That's right. Peterson: And here's something to think about.
 Concerning marriage, for example -
 people always ... and I think it is
 through the significant impermanence of our culture,
 people are always rushing everywhere looking for the perfect partner,
 which would be perfect for them,
 and, you know, think -
 if you find the perfect partner, he or she will run away from you screaming at the same moment.
 Pajo: [laughs] Peterson: It turns out
 this ideality needs to be built in a relationship,
 if you accept a partner in all imperfections.
 And hope your partner will do the same.
 You have to swear to each other that you will not run away.
 And as a result, you can embark on a mutual transformation process,
 which becomes possible as you tell each other the truth.
 And having a sincere relationship ...
 I mean, as a consequence of that -
 a transformation will take place.
 You can start with a frog, but she can turn into a prince.
 Pajo: Yes! This is exactly what we were talking about.
 This is the structure of the world.
 This is on a personal level,
 that's what it is on a social level ... Peterson: Yes, that's right.
 Pajo: A little hint: we've talked about the story of Abraham before,
 as three angels came to him and announced,
 that he will have a son.
 The same thing happens in the tale of the sleeping beauty.
 The queen goes to the pond, and there
 she is greeted by a talking frog.
 And the frog declares that the queen
 a baby will be born, the most beautiful baby in the world.
 Here it is, it’s the idea of ​​something going on
 from Chaos ... Peterson: Yeah, and that's an interesting idea,
 for, you know, in the diagrams
 in my book, in "Value Maps",
 one of the diagrams is an egg,
 which is the Chaos in which things sink.
 But Chaos is an absolute state, in a sense,
 it is a state of uncertainty as such.
 And we do not perceive the unknown as such.
 We always perceive only what is partly known or partly unknown.
 And it’s just about a frog sitting by a pond.
 The frog lets you ... so to speak,
 the frog is the ambassador of Chaos, roughly speaking.
 And you always meet only with the ambassador of Chaos, but not with Chaos itself.
 Peterson: It's like ... it's like ... [confused] Pajo: It's nonsense.
 Peterson: Yes, that's right! Pajo: It's out of being,
 below being, if you will. Peterson: Exactly.
 Pajo: And now, if you think about it ... two things -
 the first thing that’s interesting, then, is that frog Kermit
 also all this!
 Kermit is the host, he hosts the show,
 and what does he do? He makes the transition
 between different worlds.
 Peterson: Yes. Pajo: And lo and behold, there is action,
 and there is this figure of transition that appears, and a new action begins.
 Peterson: Yes! Pajo: It's the role of Kermit's frog,
 which he plays in this puppet show.
 Peterson: And his main problem is
 Miss Piggy, this tumultuous feminist.
 Pajo: [laughs out loud] What a laugh! Peterson: [smiles]
 Pajo: Yeah, well, now about Pepe, because we're still doing "Pepe's Metaphysics."
 Peterson: Yes. Pajo: That's what's going on in the world -
 a strange situation in which people -
 call them right, or forces of order,
 or ... [confused] or ...
 let's say the norm. People who create the norm
 for the whole public, right? Peterson: Yes.
 Pajo: And here's a situation where things turned upside down.
 People who were previously narratively destined to create the norm,
 now make marginals.
 Peterson: Yes. Pajo: They are being pushed to the margins, right?
 Peterson: That's right. Pajo: And they are told: "You created the norm -
 and now we will squeeze you out, make you marginalized. "
 Peterson: And so you think they tied themselves to a frog?
 Pajo: Yeah, so they tied themselves to a frog! Peterson: Oh, my God ...
 Pajo: That's what happened - there was a strange inversion,
 the power of inversion and the power of ridicule,
 the power ... of humor - usually
 on the side of Chaos. This is usually ...
 the power of the marginal, without any questions.
 Peterson: Yes!
 And I noticed that ... it seems to have started twenty years ago -
 all ... all comedians have become right!
 Pajo: [laughs] Peterson: I thought - what the hell ?! What's going on ?!
 The right wing usually has no comedians, all comedians in the left!
 Pajo: Yes! Peterson: The left pokes the right and laughs.
 It's very strange that comedians ...
 that the right wing began to manifest itself in comedy.
 Pajo: Yes! This is a sign that
 that a strange inversion occurred,
 and there is an interesting, as it were ... [confused]
 interesting thing: the bible has a story,
 which tells of this - the story of the prophet Elijah.
 In the days when he lived, Israel, as it were,
 worshiped false gods, as Queen Isabel wanted.
 Right? And Elijah, the one who was supposed to be a prophet
 the true God of these people,
 was made a marginal character.
 His name is Ilya the Wanderer.
 Peterson: God ... Pajo: And that's weird, because he has to be a prophet of God,
 but his instrument of prophecy is mockery.
 He mocks the prophets of Baal,
 and this, you know, is not something you would normally find in the Bible,
 when ridicule becomes a tool for restoring order.
 And this is what we see in Pepe’s characters.
 Pepe is like an inversion machine.
 People who use it, what do they do?
 They take insults that fly in their direction,
 and they turn them over,
 return them to those from whom they flew.
 That’s what you’ve done with this “kermit” theme, and it’s perfect.
 People make fun of you, say your voice is like Kermit's,
 and you say, “Okay, I accept that,
 and I will make it my strong point. ” Pepe does the same.
 There are a lot of very crazy pieces made with it.
 There are a lot of very dark traits in Pepe's character,
 you know things I wouldn’t touch.
 Peterson: Huh, you know, when I first saw the frog,
 Pepe the frog, I was a little wary.
 It contains some element of comic hidden horror.
 To me, this element seemed disgusting.
 So, you know, unknowingly disgusting.
 Pajo: Yes. But, you know,
 it is as if its purpose. Peterson: Yes.
 Pajo: And this formulates the power of those who use it.
 This can be seen even in the first comic where it appeared.
 Stupid such a comic. Here's a frog,
 walking ... [confused] to the toilet, pee,
 but lowers his trousers all the way to his ankles.
 And she does something like that - usually
 when you lower your pants to your ankles, you sit down and do a little different,
 but the frog does it standing up, and here it is, this element ...
 He shows us his ass.
 And here it is - this power of inversion,
 which gives a person the opportunity to ascend again. [laughs]
 This is a double inversion -
 that’s what people enjoy when they use these images.
 As you supposedly know
 allegedly radical leftists tell them:
 "You are white men in control, blah blah blah ..."
 that's all, and the people who enjoy Pepe,
 they say, "Ha!" And they reflect
 it's back and then ... the people who blame them,
 just going crazy. Just going crazy
 but all they do is say, “Well, you call me a racist,
 blah blah blah ... ”and they reflect that,
 return and overturn,
 they say, “Okay. I'll show you who you call me. "
 And then, you know, the left,
 the radical left is just raging. And this, you know, a little ...
 If you look at this people, the “alternative right,”
 they have this amazing magical power, huh?
 Look at Miley, Miley Yanopolis,
 he is just a perfect example. You know, here you are -
 half Greek, half Jew, gay Catholic,
 supports Trump, Peterson: Englishman!
 Pajo: Yes, an Englishman in America ...
 and ... Peterson: And he's arguing with Republicans.
 Pajo: That's right! People can't touch anything in it,
 for he is like a frog, he is literally
 this marginalized figure,
 which stands somewhere aside - but, you know, it’s like
 twice turned over, it seems ...
 don't know if he intended it but looks like
 that he restores order through this double coup. Very strange.
 Peterson: Indeed, it is very strange.
 Pajo: [laughs]
 Anyway ... I would say ...
 Be careful. It's dangerous.
 Peterson: Yes. Yes.
 I try very hard to be careful.
 Trust me, I talk to a lot of people,
 which help me formulate arguments,
 label them correctly ... I do my best
 to hold well on the ground. My eyes are open.
 I don't have to be angry.
 After all, I’m really in Chaos. Pajo: Yes!
 Peterson: And don’t think it’s like a disaster.
 I don’t know what will happen to me next.
 I don’t know if it’s the worst or the best thing that has happened to me.
 I can't say ... Pajo: Yes. And a solution to the situation,
 when you get into Chaos,
 when Jonah is dragged by a whale, right into the depths of the ocean ...
 while he's in the whale's belly,
 to him comes the decision.
 Peterson: Yes! Pajo: There comes this moment of discovery,
 if it rolls over -
 the discovery is to roll over,
 and in that moment is the moment of his death,
 which becomes the moment of his baptism and he goes out,
 and he returns to the city, yes,
 that's another part, but ... [confused]
 The solution to get out of Chaos -
 now it's not very ... Peterson: Yes,
 and this is a big problem.
 You need to move very deep into Chaos to find a solution.
 Pajo: [laughs] And there's always a risk of losing
 yourself when you’re in Chaos.
 Peterson: Yes, that's right. That's the thing with dragons -
 they can eat you.
 Pajo: Yes, they can eat you. Peterson: That's ... That's why me
 dislikes the “new age” of Jung’s thinking.
 It seems Joseph Campbell was a little responsible for that,
 although he did a lot of useful work.
 But the essence of the confrontation with
 what are you afraid of - that it's scary, and that
 that it can eat you.
 And it has already eaten a lot of people to you.
 And it's no joke to you.
 And during all this ...
 call it the "path traveled",
 I mean - what will happen?
 Especially during the first few weeks,
 when I was called a transphobe, a geek,
 here are all these insults and I was just trampled,
 the least inside my university, for my views,
 and it was not at all obvious
 that the moment will come ... as if ... [confused]
 that it will be possible to emerge from all this, so to speak.
 Pajo: Huh ... But that, you know,
 it worries me a lot since now
 we have as if two monsters are fighting each other.
 On the one hand - this frog Pepe,
 which, incidentally, has already been defined as a symbol of hatred
 in the Anti-Defamation League. Do you know about this?
 And it’s just awful. Terrible that
 everything has gone so far.
 You know, all of a sudden ...
 They may see a monster on the other side, however
 don't see her on your own. Peterson: Yes.
 Pajo: And LGBTQ ... so on, so on,
 I mean, and there are ... [confused]
 liminal form.
 Peterson: Just look at what’s going on with that.
 The same thing happened with gender neutral pronouns.
 They broke the duality, the endless division began
 potential identities.
 So Chaos manifests itself.
 All these letters are just growing
 on the acronym LGBT.
 This is an example of just this:
 "We are marginals ..." - "Yes, we are also marginals!"
 “What about us? We are also marginalized! ”
 And I think it’s partly through that
 each person is in some sense a marginal.
 At least one element in it,
 apparently small, but it’s a seriously marginal element.
 Pajo: Yes.
 And I wonder how the rainbow became a symbol,
 an ideal symbol of this community.
 The rainbow is literally endless.
 It is very fluid. Very fluid.
 There are not seven colors in a rainbow, a rainbow is a spectrum of colors,
 it contains Chaos itself,
 it is the division of the Order into an indefinite number
 different things.
 Yes? And we highlight seven colors in the rainbow,
 but really ...
 the rainbow is a spectrum of colors. Peterson: Yes, yes.
 Pajo: She’s vaguely big. It can be divided
 on an infinite number of pieces. Peterson: Yes. Pajo: No limits,
 to which it can be divided.
 Peterson: And it seems to me that this is a problem
 of the law of identities - as if ...
 well ... imagine ...
 Identity is a very important thing.
 Identity is something you always have.
 And identity is also something we give out.
 And you need to include your identity
 into the world of society. It is in a sense a game.
 There must also be a function in identity.
 That's why this law is so dangerously harmful -
 it says, "Your identity can be whatever you want."
 No, she can't! You need to live with other people!
 It's like saying, "You can play any game you want."
 You can't because ...
 Pajo: We need to play together! Peterson: You need other people to play!
 Pajo: Yes, we play together! Peterson: You could say:
 "Play my game!" - but even small children,
 that play on the school playground when they say:
 "Play my game!" - they are simply expelled. Pajo: Yes.
 Peterson: The game itself has to be playable.
 This is a completely different thing. There are ... There are ... [confused]
 There are games that can be played and games that cannot be played.
 And there's one thing that Piaget, a child development psychologist, pointed out,
 Piaget - about games:
 One of the hallmarks of an acceptable game is that people
 want to play it voluntarily.
 And here is the second part of the law, in which everything is very bad:
 you have a game
 and this is a game that you have chosen subjectively - so it is written in the law -
 "If you're next to me, you have to play my game."
 Like it or not.
 And the problem lies in this ...
 well, where is the limit? And the answer is
 there is no limit, it is an infinite division.
 The whole goal of the public is to make everyone play the game,
 which will be more or less fair to which all,
 in part, can join, albeit by donating part of themselves,
 but so can you defeat Chaos,
 The chaos of war of all against all, for example -
 the dream of the Hobbesian legal system.
 Life is short, hard and hard.
 Pajo: It’s an addition to the conversation
 about the metaphysics of the frog Pepe, which I conducted with Dr. Jordan Peterson.
 Strange changes are taking place in our world.
 And hopefully, if we can understand them,
 we will be able to dodge evil.
 As I discussed with Dr. Peterson,
 the frog is a chaotic symbol.
 Like an amphibian, it exists in two worlds simultaneously,
 therefore it becomes an image of something borderline between these worlds.
 Another possible aspect of this border is
 in the monster when we meet her -
 shape change. This change, like hybridity -
 a sign that we are in a place where categories fall apart, on the very edge of the world.
 In the case of a change in shape this characteristic
 emerges as a strength of borderline characters.
 This is the power of fluidity.
 Like the Trickster Chmut, which takes several forms,
 to commit his mischievous deed.
 To fully understand what the frog Pepe embodies,
 we need to understand how the change of form takes place,
 and how it gives preference to those who possess it.
 Pepe the Frog is a meme.
 Perhaps even the most popular meme of all time.
 Pepe’s images just ignited the internet.
 And anyone in the world can make such an image.
 So there are thousands and thousands of images of Pepe.
 And these images are of different kinds - from the glorified emoticon
 to fecal perversions, horrible so much you can’t imagine.
 And because Pepe became this chaotic,
 fluid, changeable character -
 it becomes a mirror.
 Just like water can also be a mirror.
 And it turns out because
 that there are so many images of Pepe,
 when people look at this chaotic set of images,
 they can’t “process” them all.
 They need to first divide them into categories.
 And to bring them into categories,
 they apply their own patterns of thinking.
 As if reflecting their thinking on this chaos.
 And, forcing chaos to take shape ...
 they make chaos the image of their own ideas.
 Maybe even a picture of their ideological obsession.
 And here's what's happened lately:
 some right-wingers,
 the so-called "alternative rights",
 enjoyed this effect as a mirror
 against the "warriors of social justice."
 Everything has gone so far,
 that the BCC even designated Pepe
 as a symbol of hatred.
 And the Anti-Defamation League recognized him as a symbol of hatred.
 Frog. Drawn frog.
 It was so ridiculous
 that the League later nevertheless withdrew some statements in this regard.
 It is clear that this whole event was politically motivated.
 But how could such nonsense happen at all?
 Well ...
 Some of Pepe's images are some
 of the thousands and thousands of these images,
 have a racist theme.
 There was Pepe-Hitler,
 was Pepe of the Ku Klux Klan,
 was Pepe- "insidious Jew",
 was a Pepe-African American in the prism of racist stereotypes,
 was Pepe-Mexican with all the clichés on the subject of Mexicans.
 All these examples just sink
 among the thousands and thousands of other Pepe images available online.
 But when the "warriors of social justice" looked in the mirror,
 in this pond images of Pepe,
 all they could see
 all that affected them was their own ideology.
 Rather, the imprint of their ideology.
 Changed. The dark shadow of their ideology.
 Of course, the accusations flew instantly -
 "Pepe is a racist symbol!"
 "Pepe is a symbol of hatred!"
 This is very ironic, because first of all no one has control over this character.
 No one has any control over it.
 Pepe is everything and everyone, and also nothing and none at the same time.
 And declaring it a symbol of hatred,
 The BCC showed its own absurdity.
 To the great delight of those who enjoyed this meme.
 But there is an even greater irony hidden here.
 If you look closely at what images they pulled,
 calling them racist,
 you will find a strange contradiction.
 You see: on one side - Hitler-Pepe,
 KKK-Pepe, Trump-Pepe.
 On the other hand - "insidious Jew",
 African American, Mexican.
 This means that Pepe at the same time -
 archetypal oppressor,
 which is considered by the victim,
 and also the archetypal "scapegoat,"
 which is considered by the oppressor.
 It turns out that Pepe is both sides of racism
 at the same time.
 When the BCC looks at these images,
 they automatically, without even thinking
 organize them to fit their ideology.
 And this immediately exposes their program:
 for they automatically decided that if Pepe was Hitler,
 or the KKK, or Trump - Pepe is identified
 with these people.
 But if he is an "insidious Jew," or an African-American, or a Mexican,
 Pepe acts as a mockery of these people and criticizes them.
 Why such an absurd image of Hitler
 as a painted frog - not a mockery of Hitler?
 To tell the truth,
 all that the BCC sees -
 imprint of themselves.
 Your dream, your shadow.
 Quite a pathological urge,
 which we have seen in the last few months -
 to accuse everyone of commitment to Hitler, Nazism, white nationalism -
 an expression of their hidden desire.
 The desire to "assert" through the meeting
 with his “other side”.
 Funny, because the discourse of "otherness"
 was the ideological weapon of the left
 since the 1960s.
 And now the time has come when
 The "others" came to hunt for them.
 Applying this strategy,
 people who used Pepe's images,
 gained an advantage due to the power of Chaos.
 Gained an advantage where the frog jumps into the pond,
 and descends to the very bottom,
 to find the golden ball.
 As I explained
 during my conversation with Dr. Peterson, on the subject of the tale of the frog and the princess.
 But a frog can’t be in the water all the time.
 This is a very significant detail.
 At some point you need to finish the tale.
 To finish the tale, the frog needs to find a golden ball.
 We can say that the golden ball is the Sun,
 that will rise and begin a new day.
 Frogs need to get a golden ball
 and return it to the surface above the water.
 She needs to carry the most significant thing,
 carry over so she can see the world and the princess,
 so she could grow.
 If that doesn't happen,
 it is not known what may come out of the water.
 If the frog stays in the water too long,
 she will be eaten, she will pull out
 far more horrible monster.
 Because out there in the water, there's a lot more,
 in addition to the golden ball.
 And the frog can make Leviathan devour her.
 And it is quite possible.
 While the frog swims in the dark,
 BCC everyone is looking in the mirror,
 calling his shadow.
 We have already seen what it turns into
 this is the game they play.
 The frog can bring something other than the world of a new day.
 It can cause the same monster
 with which the BCC so want to overcome.
 And so, the frog swims. How,
 how she will do it, how to recognize her
 the golden ball that lies at the bottom of the pond?
 It is not easy to recognize that there is that,
 when things are embraced by darkness.
 But the tale already has
 the answer to this question.
 Frogs need to get out of the water
 and become a prince.
 Frogs need to change, to become something else.
 And return to the surface of the golden ball -
 it is the same as turning a frog into a prince.
 One cannot happen without the other.
 And, as Dr. Peterson suggested in his lectures,
 the way to do it is to understand yourself.
 Go down into the depths of yourself.
 Find the golden ball that is hidden in the dark.
 Go down and find
 the most significant thing of Western civilization.
 As suggested by Dr. Peterson,
 the most significant thing of Western civilization is the Logos.
 The truth that is the Word.
 We saw Chaos roar, wanting to drown
 in this noise Truth.
 Peterson: What I'm going to talk about is freedom of speech.
 I want to tell you something about freedom of speech.
 I thought about it very carefully ...
 I’ve been thinking about this very closely for the last two weeks.
 * noise * Partly it's through the video I made ...
 We must find the Word,
 for it is the Sun rising from the darkness.
 The word is that which overcomes Death itself
 and lives again.