It's my birthday and for my birthday I wantwhat I have wanted for the last 38 years even
before I was able to verbalize it.
I want world peace an end to poverty solutionto the climate change crisis just the basics
like what all of us want and I think its obtainableIf you know me in real life I hope you know
me as someone who is both compassionate andintelligent
I, unlike Trump, underestimate my ideas andtalents so I do not say this lightly.
This thing inside of me that is trying toget out this idea is one that can save us
all.
I have spent the last year trying to explainit to the masses and come to the conclusion
that I am just not that person.
I concentrate too much on the HOW we are goingto solve it instead of the WHY that speaks
to people and I have trouble conveying thewhat i find it too complex
This video is an attempt to explain the whatI am trying to create to the people who already
get the why in hopes of finding the peopleto cocreate the how.
The WHY should be obvious if I have to explainto you how our current system is broken you
probably just aren't my people yet, and that'sOK.
But if you believe capitalism is inherentlybroken that it is designed to fail and it
needs to be dismantled, peacefully, then youare who I am looking for.
The how is complex and I have spent the lastfew years specifically diving deeper into
that it involves unleashing our collectivepower through technology the power of the
crowd our own individual passions and an overallshift from a system based on competition to
one based on cooperation.
there is not enough time to explain all ofthe ins and outs but that is about the jist
of what I can do in that amount of timenow to explain the what to the best of my
ability.
This is not so easy for me.
The best name I have been able to come upwith is Technological socialism.
We start with one project which soon becomesthe core of a massive global cooperative that
owns everything.
We start one project and it devours capitalismfrom inside.
We create a global cooperative that will eventuallyown nearly everything.
We start with technology because it is cheapand has infinite potential but we do move
on to the entire means of production.
When it makes sense for us to own factoriesand mines we buy factories and mines.
We create an online space that is designedfor collaboration.
Once that space is in existence we are thenable to create other technology from that.
Once we create the space for us to collaborateon projects it unleashes our own human potential
because we are able to find projects thatspeak to us and contribute in a way that is
meaningful to us and creating that platformis easy that is not what is complex.
If we had Facebook that was designed for collaborationand contribution instead of for profit and
we all owned it and it was run through democracyand transparency think about what we could
do.
And that is what I am trying to create.
I need people who want to co create a worldwhere we have zero poverty where climate change
and other environmental catastrophes are apriority we don't just gloss over in the name
of economics.
I just need those people so if you could pleaseshare this video I need to find the people
who want to co create that world people whowant to put their time and energy into creating
a system based on cooperation in hopes ofcreating a better world.
Not in hopes I can see the path I can seeit very clearly I just can’t explain it
all in a 5 minute video.
so if this spoke to you at all please contactme become part of it.
If you just want to stay up to date on whatis going on I am hoping to well I am not hoping
this is going to happen I am going to do thisevery day until it gets made so if you want
to follow that along and my own personal journeythen join my Facebook group on Crowd Democracy
I will keep that up to date if you want tobe involved and actually put your blood sweat
and tears like I'm going to into this pleasecontact me at my email and introduce yourself.
My email is collaborativedemocracy@gmail.comTogether we can come up with a better name
later but those are just what I have to workwith today.
So happy Birthday to me please share thisvideo and please contact me so we can co create
a better system together.