This title
I didn't really realised I'll be it
speaking to the audience that actually
includes witches and wizards
so...
(voice from the audience)
ye, I'll probably...I'll probably meet them in the question period,
that will be my guess
So, can you all hear me?
One of you can  hear me
How was that
That's better? Ok
All right. Good
All right. So
As you can plainly see
the title of this talk is
"Dragons,
Divine Parents,
Heroes and Adversaries:
A complete cosmology of being"


Sounds dreadfully New Age to me
But it's not



New age people are very creative
But they can't think critically
But I can think critically
So this is a creative

theoretical enterprise
Conjoint with the capacity
to tell the difference
between  bad ideas
and good ideas
And hopefully
what I'm going to talk to you about
are the graetest ideas  that humanity
has ever produced
They're are also ideas,
that we're....
we dont understand well...
and
who's highest level of formal developement
we risk forgetting because
we're criticising things
that we
we've invented as a species, but that that we can not undersand rationally, and....
We predisposed to believe that
Ideas that we can't understand rationally have to be wrong
...and sometimes that's true; but sometimes we're just not smart enough to understand them
so...
I can give you an example of something that we are not really smart enough to understand.
We are not really smart enough to understand, why people would line up for four nights...
...for ten blocs to watch Star Wars,
You know ;  I mean; they won't do that for a lecture.
( laughter )
...and they wouldn't pay money...
So, you know, that Star Wars, for example, is naturally
...is naturally interesting.
Anad people just take that for granted.
But the fact, that people would line up..
To..to engage voluntarily in the ritual activity of that sort...
..is a manifestation of something that is very deep in human psyche, that we do not comprehend well.
So, I'm gonna talk to you about
What I like to think about as " a grammar of believe"
I got interested in this, back in the mid-eighties
I was..
..I was driven mostly by the interest in...
...global warfare that was ideologicaly motivated, and also atrocity...
Warefare was not so difficult to understand in some sense because you can map it on to...
...animal teritoriality...
But atrosity in a service of ideology is a wholle different thing
There is certanly clearer that for example in a World War II,
When the Nazis had to make a choice....perhaps between winning the war ...
And excelerating the rate in which they were killing Jews...
...they chose the latter!
And it's very difficult to understand that  using a model based on the animal teritoriality
I started reading...
about
believe systems widely...
..in..
... political writtings, and economic writtings, and religion writtings and psychological writtings
Anywhere I could find a tread that i thought was promising
I red a lot  of Jung,
I red a lot of Freud,
Almost all  the  great clinical psychologists
A lot of Solzhenitsyn, a lot of George Orwell
A lot of people, lot of Dostoyevsky and Nietzsche
They're all people who, as far as I can tell,  have something very original to say
...and...
Out of that...
I learned to understand why people need Believe
Why is actually inevitable
Why fait is inevitable
Fait is inevitable in part because your knowlage is fine, and than so, you have to take some things for granted
Or you fall into an infinite regres
And what, maybe constituted the difference between pathological believe...
...and non pathological believe
And those are terms, by the way, that I think can be defined technically
Which is a...
...statement that's runs contrary to the pre-supposition, say, of moral relativism
I'm definately not a moral relativist
I think, it constitues a..
I think the motivation for moral relativism fundamentally is the desire to abdicate  responsibility
Even though you can make a strong intelectual cases for
...for why moral relativism is correct
The intelectual case in an actual motivation have nothing to do with one another however...
I've also found out something else, which is quite interesting, and I dont know how much I can touch on it tonight, but...
...I'dont think that Newton and Darwin are commensurate
I think that most modern peoples are Newtonians, not Darwinians
And I think that , you can understand the grammar of believe, which is religious in nature
Using Darwinian's principals
But it means that you have to give up your Newtonian's pre-suppositions
And so..
I think    I can make that argument implicitly with  what I'm doing as   I progress tonight
So the first thing I'm going to tell you  is that
Its necessary for you to look at the world through the limited frame of reference
Other  reason for that  is  -  you're not very smart
Your consciousness can only hundle about four bits of information per second
It's not very much given that the number of bits of informations comming at you from external world are
Pro  practical purposes   infinite
You're like Aldous Huxley  sugested
Your brain seems to be  primarily reducing agent
Yyour bodies are reducing agent as well, because
There are a lot of things that  you just can't detect and than...
Tthe room that you sitting in is a reducive agent because
Is keeping all sort of things  out
Tthat you would  otherwise have to deal with, and
The stability of the city is reducing agent because
We're not going to be stampeded by barbarians with any luck at every moment or any moment
..we..
...we deal with the complexity of the wotld in part by
Iinhabiting a sequence of  reducing structures
Until the world is reduced enough so that we can actually
Deal with the minute elements of it that we can
Comprehend at any one moment
And those are elements we comprehend
...am..
Are not the familiar objects of
objective reality
Iin fact
Animals
and people included
Are not much interested in ojective reality
We're interested in
pragmatic reality
Pragmatic reality is
the reality you act on
Not that you percieve
And because we're
embeded in bodies
And because we are biological organisms
And because we are concerned
with survival and reproduction
Among other things
How to act is
a much more important
Much more important question for us then
What is the the world constituted of
How to act
In some sense
is also the prime Darwinian question
Right? Because if you act
wrongly
from a Darwinian perspective you end up dead
before you can reproduce
So Darwinism
Is a pragmatic
theory
In fact
The pragmatysts, the... the american pragmatists on the ...

North American east coast
Recognised that
Very short period of time
after Darwin's studies was published
They recognised the connection between
pragmatism as a theory
and
Darwinian theory
instantaneously
So the world tht we inhabit
given that we're alive
And given that
What's selected as "selected"
As to act is
Actually the  pragmatic world
And the objects of pragmatic worlds
aren't objects
They're tools
And obstacles
And they have valiance
a  priority!  They're....
They have value A priority
From the Newtonian's perspective you look at the world
And then you think about the world
that you see
The objects of the world that you see
And than you evaluate them
And then you act
That is not how the brain works
Is just wrong
You might see the value of things
before you see
the object itself
I mean...there are people  for example
Who are blind
They are blindsight
They can recognise emotions or faces
without knowing
thay  can see
So
That's partialy
Because the retina is attached to they'r amygdala
The retina is attached
to  lot of your body
Not just your visual cortex
It's attached to your spinal cord
It's attached to your nervous system
at multiple levels of analysis simultaneously
And, so you can use your eyes
to detect things
That you dont know you're seeing
So
Than in some sense
What you're after  to detect in those circumstances is..
"valience" - value so
You're very good for example
at detecting teeth
and
predatory eyes and
the reasons for that are
self evident
Fundamentally
This is the smallest  unit
of meanning that makes up
a referential frame
I think
It has
three elements
One of which links the mind to the body
Actually  the mind-body problem
is not that difficult to solve
If once you take a pragmatic..
Once you look at how the brain works
from the pragmatic perspective
Because then
you're
your consciousness
Is fundamentally something
That is grounded in action
And you can undersand the transition
Between consciousness and action
As a sequence of ...of
Analysis that are increasingly
Action oriented
I'll talk to you about it a little bit later
But the basic framework is something like this
And you're always looking at the world
Through this framework
And the framework has one point
Where you are and what you're doing
Where you are now
So that's point "A"
You always trying to get from point "A" to point "B"
Because you are linear creature
And you' re embodied
So you are moving
And so... fundamentally
What you looking at the world through
Is a sequence of maps
And maps tell you
How to get to where you want to go
And so..the maps specify where you are
Because obviously you can't get anywhere
If you don't know where you are
And many people of course are confused where they are
So they dont get anywhere
And you also has to know where are you going
And that's point "A" and point "B"
And every time you look at the world
You're looking through a framework
That has those two valued points implicit
In your cognitive structure
And generaly what you think is
"Where you going is better than where you are"
Because otherwise why would you go there?
Now. Some people do choose
To go to the places
That are worse  that
Where they are
But they are "special case"
You probably live with some of them
( audience laughs)
Now, when you're  going
From point "A" to point"B"
Fundamentally you have to move
And movement is not "abstract"
Movement is what you do with your body
And so..once your abstract representation
Transform itself into action
You are no longer in the realm of abstraction
So in order to get from one place to another
You have to know where you are
And you have to know where you're going
And you have to what?  fly ,run, roar
You have to perform
Some sort of ambodied action
To get there
And of course you have conscious control
over your volountary muscular system
But underneath that you dont realy have enything at all
Right? you can move your arm
You have no idea what muscles you're moving
So that your conscious representation of your body
Grounds out basicly involountary movement
of the larger muscles systems
So
Now you might ask
What does specify
Where you're going
And the answer to that,
In large part is biology
But biology in a complex manner
And this is where the higher order
Morality starts to become a concern
You share with other animals
All the way down the fild of genetic chain
Various forms of
of implicit motivation and, you know, you can kind of lump those
It's arbitrary
I lump them into "self-mainenance" motivations
And "self-propagation" motivations
You can pack it different ways
Like I said: it's more conseptual
Than based on-say-you know
Anatomy
But it'll do
"Self-maintenance" well
You don't want to get too hot
You don't wonna get to cold
Your hypothalamus deal with that
Very old part of the brain
Is way more important than your cortex
You can take the whole cortex of the female cat
And as long as you keep it in the cage
And it has its hypothalamus
It can pretty much behave
Like a cat
Exept that is hypo-exploratory
Which is the last thing you'd expect
From an animal with no brain
You can't be too hot;
You can't be too cold
You got to regulate your water intake
You have to eat
You have to deal with  consequences of eating
You have to be with other people
There is a place circuit,
A specialised place circuit
There is a specialised erotic circuit
There is specialised circuit for exploration
Which is...it.does  half what the hypothalamus does, by the way
And those systems
They often have been conceptualized
as "drives"
But they not really that
They more like
Isolated one eye personalities
They're like Cyclops
They want one thing
Now, they're not stupid
But they not very...
...amenable to argument
So when you're hungry
You're hungry
And, you know, another motivational system
might object to that
But..and that's happens frequently,
Which is partly why people are often confused,
And also why you need a cortex
Because, you know, you need a cortex
To allow the computic motivational system
To array them-selves properly and harmonously
Across time
so they all get they do
Insted of fighting like two years-old's in the room
Because two-year old's a basicaly hypothalamic
You know. So there are lots of fun
But they are not organised
And they are not social at all
So what happens with the motivational system
Is very deep in your brain
Is they
They specify the value of where you are
So one of the values
might be...I'm thirsty
And than
They tune your perception so that
Things that are associated with
The quenching of thirst
Are much more likely to be picked up by your perceptual system
And they bias your
Perceptual processing
And your valuation
towards the.....
Towards improvement of that
motivational lack
And so you can't really think of them as drives
Because they way more complicated than that
They specify where you are
So there is an element of self-consciousness
That associated with that
"I'm thirsty"
And they specify your target
Usualy using fantasy
You know, when you get thirsty
You think : what I'd like to drink and
You've little fantasy about
Maybe a glass of juice or a bit of water
Or something like that and
And then your nervous system
Is tuned and you walk into a kitchen
And you ignore everything
That's irrelevant to the serch for
Liquid and you focus on everything that relevant
To the serch for liquid and
Thats means you so blind
You can not believe it
There's been many experiments now
That have shown that
You can do things like
I'm sure that some of you seen this
You can introduce a gorilla
Into a basketball game
and 60% or 70%  of the people watching
As long as they paying attention to the ball
They wont see the gorilla
And it's not like a little, tiny gorrila
That somewhere of in the corner
It's like  maine centre
6 feet high beatting his chest
And, even when you know that
If something else chenges in the background
You wont see that either
So as far as you guys know
that...
Carpet could be changing colour
50; 20 times a minute
You wouldn't even notice it
Unless, you have some weird obsession with carpets
So...
Ok. So that's the beginning
In some sense
Of the universal system of values, right?
And I can tell you how universl this is
I always have to tell the story
Because its dumb funny
I just cannot believe it
..So...
One of the things that your brain is very concern with
Is relative status
That's why you're in
By the way
Which is
Partly why relative poverty
Is often such a social problem
People hate being low in status
Specially man
Male status hierarchy
Is a bit different than women
And women are pretty sensitive to status too
But they use different markers
Anyways
Part what happens
When your status go up
Is that your brain serotonin level goes up
And when your brain serotonin level goes up
You're less irritable and you expierience
Less negative emotion
Per unit of uncertenity your threat
And so when you demean someone
And you interfiere with
And you lower they presume status
As far as the very primodial
Circuit is concern
You alter the system that regulates their emotions
And they hate that
People hate that more than anything
And it's an unbelieveble archaic circuit
You can kind' tell this because
Depresed people
Basicaly act like they are low status
And depress people  are depress about
Everything
Now. There is not easy to be depressed
About everything, right?
And so the fact that that the case
Means that whatsever gone estray
Has to be very primodial
Because it efects everything
anyways
People often use
anty-depressant to cure depression
Hence their name
and anty-depressants
Decrease the rate in which serotonin is taken back up
By the nurons that produce it
well...
300 millions years ago
Crustaceans emerged
And crustaceans lives in dominance hierarchy
Even if they're not particulary social
And if one lobster fights with another
And gets defeated
Than he won't fight with another lobster
Even if he beats for 20 minutes
Unless you give him anty-depressant
In which case he will fight right away
The reason I'm telling you this
is because
The status structure, that...
Underlines
Your being , not just your brains, but your being
Is... is so old
You share it with crusstaceas
So you mess with that at your peril
It's not learned
By no means
So anyways
You wonder around inside one of this little frames
Going from point"A" to point "B" over time
And one annoying things about life is
And this is one of the Sisyphus's story is that
As soon as you climb from point "A" to point "B"
And you get there
Than
There is another point "A"and another  point "B"
and
Thats kind of interesting too because
One of the thing that suggest is that
Getting somwhere isn't really what people want
Because as soon as you get somwhere than you're done going there
And then you have to go somwhere else,so
In some sense it seams it is an acomplishment and in another sens it is just
The next go up on the mountain, and we all know this because you know, you all graduated from the university
And that was a good day but the next day you were'nt  university student, you were just some unemployed looser
You  know, and so, and that's sets up the whole new set of problems, right?
And that how the whole frame shifts
And when the frame shifts like that , than the value of everything shifts around it
Turns out  that people are actually  more interested in getting from point A to point B
Than they are in actually being at point B
And all the positive emotions that you feel which is related to dopaminergic circuitory by the way
You experience in relationship  to the pursuit of the value goal
Rather than to attainment of the goal
The attainment of the goal actually satisfies you
Or more specificlly it satisfy that motivational circuit,but then the dumb thing just shuts off
And another one starts yelling at you
So is like pervers form of victory
One answer to that that universal in some sense is that
You should establish a relationship with the transcended value
Because it never runs out of motivational power
You can see an example of that , popular example in popular culture in a "Pinoccio" movie
How many of you've seen that
Is anybobody not seen it?
Hmmm, thats amusing
Anyways
In the "Pinoccio" movie one of the things that happens is
When Gepetto wishes
That his son becomes a fully developed individual insted of the dumb puppet
Which is a good thing for parent to wish, by the way
He wishes upon a star and a star is signify something of the transcendent value, and so
The meaning of that fundamentally  is, that if you want to raise your child to be an independent being
Than you better set your site on something trascendent or it won't happened
And believe me there is a lot of time that it  doesn't happened
Part of the utility of the transcendent value is that it never looses its motivational effectiveness
Now you might say that is no prove that they are transcendent values,
It's like- yee, thats true,but you know,there is more to the story
Ok, so..
When you in one of this little stories, which is basically what they are,
The simplest story :I was in one place; I went by this means to another place
Thats the simplest story
Its not that exciting
Much more exciting story is :" I was going from point "A" to "B" and something weird happened"
"And than I didnt know where I was; and than I was in chaos for
...you know, two years, and than...
I figured out how to climb out of there" Everybody likes that story, right?
Thats the death and re-birth story by the way or...
A fall from paradise story
With the regaining of the paradise at the end
You know, its an archetypal story because everyone lives it
And so...
Anyways, when you in one of this little
...Stories....frames of reference...
What you see in front of you are really things that
One of the best scientist who ever study visual perception
Called
The book's called : "Ecological approach to visual perception"
He called them "affordances"
And affordance is something that affords you something
And affordances can be both:positive and negative
I like to think of than as a tools or obstracles
So for example; If I need to make a B line for that door you guys are all instantly obstracles
And the way I would respond to that
Like, implicitly, is that: you all be negative
So imagine that we just set fire
Well you were people the minute before that, but, you know, the second after that you're obstrucles
And your emotional reaction to the people that are in front of you are going to reflect that
You all know that because you drive,  you know and...
Once you encapsulated in your little insect-toy-shell
And dont't have to deal with the immediat  responses of  other people, you gonna treat them like obstracles
And like, you know, demonic obstracles at the drop of a hat
And , you know that's pretty much  automatic behaviour
So, two other things that get you to where you wanna go,
And you remember, you know, human beings are tool using animals " per excelence", right?
We are so tool using that, thats what we see
It's build right in to us
We always scanning the world for tools, when you look at gravel for example
What you actually see are throwing size rocks
That's why they manifest themselves as that kind of object to the enviroment, you know
You're build at certain level of resolution and the way your nervous system parts up the world is
Into things that are useful for you and things that aren't
And those are not objects
The whole idea of object is a...
...Very, very modern derivative of that mach more primodial system
And its, by no means, clear at all that our notion of objects is more real than the notion of affordance
In fact, as far  as your brain is concerned
Objects
...no one cares about objects...
What your brain cares about are affordances, and what your brain is adapted to
Is the world as a set of affordances and obstracles
And if you are Darwinian, its very difficult to escape the conclusion
That what selected you is reality
And so that if the reality that selected you shape you so that what you see are affordances and obstracles
Or you die
Then is perfectly real preposition
Perfectly resonable proposition to state that what reality is , in fact
Is the set of affordances, tools and obstracles
And that is how your brain works, by the way,
When you look at..there,look at the projector
Maybe I'm thinking about picking it up?
What happens is my eyes activate a part of my motocortex that would adjust my hand
To grip it like that.
And so part what I understand as a projector is grip-able object
And thats not secondary deravation,
I dont see the object and than think this is how I would grip it
Its like that would take forever
You know, you'd never catch a baseball if that's what you're were doing
Its like " Oh, a round object is...clunk!..." You know, its like...
Thats just not gonna work.
Really, your nervous system is no where fast enough to do that consciously
You're using reptile's circuitry to catch baseballs
The mammalian staff is to dump slow
So you catch the ball often, especially if someone piches it fast before you can even see it!
You just think you sow it
You see it after you caught it!
The case with table players too
They...what they seam to do is judge where the ball is going to go by the angle of the racket
Because if they wait till the ball is of the racket, they can't move fast enough to hit it back
They don't have the reflexes for it
So they can't move the neuromessages fast enough to do it!
Ok, so basically, the world lay itself as tools and obstracles
And, you know, obstracles make you feel bad
But like , lets say: I'm looking at this room and I'm thinking about you guys as an obstracles
You might say how bad does that make me feel?
And answer to that is : not very bad, because all I have to do is, you know
Make a circuit this route and I can get to the door
So than the fact that you're obstracles is a very minor impediment to the execution of my plan
And as a consequence it will produce corespondingly low level of negative emotion
So. You can think of those as known unknowns.
In Rumsfeld terms
Known unknowns are not that biger problem because you can plan for them
And you might have a plan that's atlernative plan that you can put in place in case they show up
What people really don't like are unknown unknowns
And unknown unknownes , you don't walk around those , man. They blow your whole map.
And your map is quite comlicated. Its actually hierarchical in structure.
And I 'll get to that.
Because, you know, you go from point "A" to point "B"so that you can go to a  bigger point "A" to point "B"
You know
You cross the road to get to the library
To study for the exam, to  pass the exam
To get your degree, to get the job
To be a person, to be a citizen, to be a , you know
To have a good life
So then if someone gets in your way
While you crossing the road, then to some degree, they're interfering with you getting the good life
Now, not very much
But sometimes you react like that
That's certenly happens when you dealing with the intimate partner, you know,
Because they will make some little mistake
And you'll say "You always do that, you've always done that, you always do and you're always going to do it"
Which is really not a good way to conduct an argument
So...
Unknown unknowns.
Well,  unknown unknowns leap at you from places that you wouldn't expect.
Because otherwise you would have planned for the dumb things,
So there are the things, that always like poke their beak up at you
When you least expect it
They are just like, say, serpents in the Garden of Eden
That might be one way of thinking about it. You can't keep the dumb snakes out of the garden.
And that's because you can't make the bound the area and keep the complexity out of it.
The complexity always sneaks back in, try protecting your children from the internet
For example
You can't make the bounded  circumstances and get rid of the complexity,
It always comes sneaking back in
So, what would be an unknown unknown? This is a good one here:
You have an intimate relationship . You've had it for ten years.
You trust your partner
So, what does that  mean?
You know where you are
You know who you are
And you have pretty good idea of where you're going!
And then one day you find out that
Your partner have been cheating on you
Not with one person , but with three people!
And for the whole ten years!
Well, hipotheticaly that comes as a shock!
Or thou, you may have ignored many intimations that such might be the case
Irrelevant!
Lets say that it comes as a shock! Well , what happends to you?
Now you don't know where you are !
You don't know where you've been!
That's interesting, hey?
Because you think you know where you've been, because you've already been there!
But all of the sudden something can happen so that you are so fliped over
That you dont even knowwhere you were
So that means in some sense , that past is dependent on the present
Very peculiar thing
You also have no idea where you going
In terms of not knowing where you are
That's deep, hey? Because you might think
"Well ,  I , you know , I thought I was in the marriage, that turns out to be wrong
I thought I knew who my wife or husband was
That turns out to be wrong
I concluded on the bases that I knew my wife that I knew something about woman
That turns out to be wrong
I thought I was in the relationship with someone I can trust
That is wrong
I don't know enough about trust, I'm obviously to galuble
And so , what that does it throw, vertualy everything that's ever happened to me
in severe doubt, right?
That the emergence of chaos!
And that's ...
...this!...
Sometimes,
You are going from point "A" to point "B"
And something you don't expect manifest itself , in the middle of your plan.
But its not such a catastrophy.
Because you can just look around it
And then sometimes, something pops up and like , you just do not have a plan anymore!
And so then you might ask yourself
Just exactly where are you when you dont know where you are.
And I would say: that's a place
And its actually a place that's well documented in ...
...clasic , religious  and mitological  stories
Thats Chaos
The Daoists , for example
They believe  that the world is made out of Chaos and Order
Order : that's where you are when what you do gets you what you want
Chaos
That's where you are when you have not idea what's going on
And you might ask: well
Is there a way that you should act when you in Chaos?
And the anwer to that is : there better be
Because it's a place you going to visit several times during your life
And everyone visits that
That's why it's an archetypal story
Thats the descent to the underground
Underground is that horrible place that lurks underneath all our presuppositions
Its the...
...frigid lake underneath thin ice that everybody is skating on
And is something that can manifest itself at any moment
Tha'ts , probably why in the Dao's  symbol the black paisley is Chaos, by the way
and the white pisley is Order
In the  Order paisley, there is the little black dot
Thats because Order can change into Chaos , and  does,  at any moment
And the revers is also true
Chaos can turn into Order at any moment
And inside will do that for you
You know; alcoholics report that
When they hit bottom is like " Khh"  there is the catalyses and they look at the world in a different way
You know; now they are new person
They back from the underground
They've risen from the dead, so to speak
You know; and it's partly because what looks like your right hemisphereis pretty good at
Infering patterns in novel and chaotic places;
It's, kind of, keeping track of things that happened to you that are anomalous
And it makes alternatives maps of the world
That are there for you to rely on
At least to some degree if that ever becomes necessary
Now, you might ask yourself
How upset should you be  when something that you don't expect happens
Now, it turns out that that's is really a difficult question to answer
Because, what the problem is that when something you dont expect happens
You don't know what it is!
And so, then you might say "well, how upset should you get?" and the answer to that is
You don't know.
And so what happens is
First of all you 've got some build in approximators
One would be...your...
Geneticaly determined level of nuroticism
Which is basicaly sensitivity to negative emotion
If you more sensitive to negative emotion, you gonna manifest more psycho-phisiological preperation
Per unit of treat or uncertainty
Which is to say some people get more upset about the same thing
Than other people do!
Now who is right?
Well....
Who knows?
You wake up in the morning and there is a little ache in your side
it's like, well, what is that?
it's sore muscle or cancer?
You don't know!
And if you hipochondrical , well its gonna be cancer!
And sometimes
The hypochondriac is right!
And so he is the one that lives when it goes to the emergency room
And finds out exactly wha'ts going on
So its an ununswerable question
Now, the other way that your brain determins how upset you should be is
By calculating your position on the dominance hierarchy
Because the higher you are on the dominance hierarchy
The more resorces you have at your disposal
And so , the less upset you have to get when anything horrible happens
So if you berely clinging to the bottom of the social structure
You can be sure that your brain is going to estimate any anomalous occurance as a catastrophy
Which is why people don't like being at the bottom of the dominance hierarchy
And is also why people who are there die a lot sooner
And they do.. they die a lot sooner
Regardless of their absolute level of wealth
It's relative deprivation that counts
Ok, so here is a bit of a clue about how else your brain might calculate
How upset you should be
Here is a little map of me when I'm doing something
That I frequently do; which is to write a manuscripts
So you might say " What are you doing when you're writing a manuscript?"
And that turns out to be a very complicated question
It's like "What you're doing when you read a book?
Well...
You're writting letters or typing them
You're typing words, you typing frases
You're typping sentences
You're typing paragraphs
You're typing the structure that the paragraphs fit in to- that's will be the essay
Ok?
Then you're...
Me, anyways, I'm practising science because I usually write some scientific manusripts
And that's part of embodying my profesorial
Role and then that's part of
Hypoteticaly, being a productive citizen
Or  thou, some of you might...
You know
differ to that , given that I'm a professor
And then
Perhaps on outside of that
This is what I think is on the outside of that is : I'm confronting the unknown
And you might say , well...
What are you really doing when you're writting a sentence
And the answer to that is : you're doing all of this things better or worst
And if you're doing realy good job of writing your sentence you're doing all of them at once
And thst would be one of the things that would make the sentence particularly meanningful
Now...
If something anomalous occurs  , let say , the letter "T" on my typewritergets stuck,
Well thats gonna irritate me because then I can;t type the sentence
Now it's not gonna irritate me too much because, you know
It does't realy interfiere with my ability to be a productive citizen
So, I'm going to
Estimate
The magnitude of how upset I should be
When something unknown occures
By estimating where in the hierarchy of action that anomaly is dysruptive
Ok, so, let me run you through this again
So lets say :
What's  " a good person?"
And you might think of that from the objective perspective
But that would be a mistake
Because
A quality , like good , is a pragmatic quality
If it's based on action, not on object
So , here is how you decompose being a good person
So...
A good person is a good parent; more than that
That's the subcomponent, right?
A good parent is someone who has a job and takes care of the family
And then, the person who takes care of their family is like
They can play with the baby
Or they can complete the meal
This are abstract concepts
You can't tell the four year old " Make a meal"
And the reason you can;t is because they dont know  the subordinate components of making the meal
You can say: " See that fork?"
Hopefully they know what the fork is
"See that fork?" "Yes" "Pick up that fork and bring that fork to the table and put it there"
They can do that
Because their nervous system is organaised enough
To operate at that level of abstraction
But they can't do something like
"Make a meal"
Which is, you know, if you got a three year old you can't put them in their room and you say:
"Clean up your room!"
They will just look at you
And then when you come back in half an hour
They will look at you again!
You can say: "Hey! Kid ! See that Teddy Bear?"
"Yeh"
"Pick up the Teddy Bear, and put it on that space in the wall"
And than once you teach the three years old how to do a hundred of those things
And they got it
They've got a little motor rutines
You can say" Clean the room"
You can encapsulate that entire set
Of motor rutines within the higher order of the concept
So if your"Being a good person"
Part of that is
Well, maybe you're making a meal and the part of that would be
Well, you're cutting up the vegetables
But then the things get interesting because when you are cutting up the vegetables
What you actually doing is are ripping something and moving
And than thats no longer abstract
Right? Thats where your conceptual philosopfical presuppositions
Like being a good person hit the roo...
Hit the ...hit the level of embodied material reality
That's the disolution of the mind into the body
Now...
If someone says to you
"You should cut those vegetables more thinly"
That might irritate you
But if they say
" You are bad parent"
Maybe observing the same phenomena
Then you're going to a fight with them
And so, the reason for that is , obviously
If it's just a matter of cutting the vegetables thinner
All you have to do is make a minor modification in the hierarchy that constitudes yourself
Representation or, realy, yourself
iT's not juet a representation
But if you are not a good parent , it's like
If that's true you've got a lot of
You've got a lot of repare work to do
A lot of your world is falling apart
And as soon as things fall apart , which they always do
You're in chaos and as soon as you are in chaos than
Your body defaults to  emergency preparation and your're stressed
And  if you're stressed long enough then you die
And so, you don't like that
Stress say, when  your body  gets stressed...
What happens is;  because it doesn't really know what's going on it prepares for everything
That's the general stress response, cortisol production does that
Cortisol production is good, it wakes you up in the morning
But if it's chronic, you get old
Like it's so...
...general in it's negative...
...actions. That the best way to conceptualise its detrimental long term effect
that its excelerating ageing
So, it makes you more likely to have heart desease, and cancer, and  depresion, and Altzheimers
And...
Diabetes and obesity
That will do.
It's enough!
Any of those are enough to kill you
All right!
So there is a hierarchy
That's the hierarchy of values
The higher the values the more
the less you wanna have it desrupted! Now...
There is psychologist named Piaget
Some of  you might know about him
Piaget was very interested in
What happens to value structures
And the hierarchical organisation
Once they have to apply outside of the confouds of the body
So, so here is the way to think about it
Two years olds-basicaly hypothalamic
Thats why they so much fun!
First they happy, then they sad, then they hungry, then they tired
You know, they just zip from one pretty straight forward and rather all inspiring motivational state
To another
And by they- two, they can't play
They will play by themselves
But they can't play with other children
They can't get that until they three
And they need to get it by the time they three
Because if they don't get it  by the time they four
They will never get it
And then you have an antisocial kid who is going to be outsider for his entire life
And there isn't anything you can do about it
So,that has to happen between two and four
So what happends about age  three is that the kid learns
How to play a game with another person
And what that game is, is fundamentally the developement of the ability
To share a frame of reference
Which is what you're doing when you play Monopoly
It's like its stupid to play Monopoly
Obviously
Who cares if you have a whole pile of counterfeit paper
Right?
But doesn't matter because the way you constituted is that
Your brain will treat anything you act
...like...
Constitutes a valuable goal as if it's a valid framework of reference
And if it could't do that: A-you couldn't abstract, and B-you could not get along with another people
So you can sit arounde the table and you can say "Lets pretend that...
...Monopoly is a reasonable facsimile of reality"
Which you would't say
But it's what you mean
And everybody says: "Yes, that would be amusing!"
And so
Than you say your goal : which is to get a little hotels and all the many
And Puf! Your emotions go along for the ride!
And whats so interesting about that is
You can get everybody in to the game
And so one of the things that's realy interesting about people
Is that we can establish a shared fictional frame of reference
And it organises all our emotions so they are predictable
That's also why we can watch movies!
You go to the movie you identify the Hero
You figure  out whet the Hero wants
Puf! You're the hero!
And the way that works is
You don't look at the Hero, and think about what is he doing, and evaluate emotionaly, and then feel it
What you do is you specify the hero's goal and then you map him on to  your body
And you read of the emotional responses of your own body
And that's how you understand the hero
So, it's embodied ...
You're using your embodiment as a...
Computational devise that can run simulations of other consciousnes
And it does that with the body
And we like doing that!
You can go to the movie and , you know
You're...
Brad Pitt for an hour and a half
You know, when you're Brad Pitt doing remarkable things
And that's also how we understand other people
We're very good at that , so, anyways, we have this share frames of reference
Like when we' re playing Monopoly
Ok, so
Children at three learn how to play games
And that means they  learn how to organise they own internal motivational  states
Into a hierarchythat includes the motivational states of other people
And that means they can play
And that's what you guys do when you out in the world
Like, we're playing the game right now
We all know the rules
Thats whay we can all sit in this room and play the game without fighting with each other
You know, and the room is set up like a theatre and we all know thw theatre game
And so, and the chairs are all facing this way at the moment
And so that's a hint that you should look forward
And this is raised so ...
You know, the room is basicaly telling you what to do
Because is a stage, like all rooms
And because you're smart and socialy conscious you can walk into a stage room
And your body knows what to do
And if you civilised and social
You just do it, than all the other primates can predict
What you're up to, and they won't kill you!
Ye! That's what it means to be part of the same tribe
You know, when people are very peculiar creatures
And God only knows what're they up to
But as long as the're playing the same  game you are
You don't have to know what's they up to
Because you can predict what are they going to do
And you understand  they motivational states
And so, part of the building and constructing of higher order of ...higher order..moral ...
...goals, is the establishment of joint frames of reference
That allow multiple people to  persue the goals that they're interested in
Simultaneously!
And than, what you have to  think about with regards to that is
That not all shared frames of reference can manage that
There is a small subset of them
That are optimised, so that not only can multiple people play them
But muliple people can play them, and enjoy them
And do it repetedl across a long period of time
So it's inner abillity that partly defines  the utility of a higher order moral structure
And that is not that arbitrary!
It's the emerging property of biological interactions
And you might say " Well it's kind of arbitrary because people can do what they want"
But it's not arbitrary at all!
Because a lot of what constraining your games
Is your motivational substructure
And those ancient circuits that are status oriented
And they operate within
Virtualy every animal has a status  counter
Creatures organise themselves into dominance hierarchies
the reason they do that is because that works
It's a solution, it's a solution to the Darwinian problem of existance
It's not just a epiphenomenon
It's the real thing
So
You, your enviroment fundamentaly, a huge chunk of your enviroment is dominance hierarchy
Plus "God only knows wher you are"
And that's Order and Chaos
And part of the reason that people fight to preserve the dominance hierarchy
Is because it's better to be a slave who knows what the hell is going on
Then someone who is thrown screaming, and naked in to the jungle at night
And that's the difference between Order and Chaos
And, we like order better than chaos and it's no wonder
Now we'll invite a liitle chaos in
For entertament now and then
But has to be done voluntarily
And generally you don't want the kind of chaos that upsets your entire conceptual structure
You know, you're willing to full around on a fringes a little bit but...
...you know, when your going gets serious you're pretty much likely to bailout
And no wonder
Now I want to tell you a little bit about
This chaotic domain
I can tell you a couple of yhings about it
It's the underworld of mitology
One of the things that kind of interesting about the underworld is
That it has a suburband one of the suburbs of the underworld is Hell
And Hell is the place where you end up when
Everything that you know falls apart
And you get resentful and bitter about it
And that's very like, one of the things that I noticed in my
Work as a clinical psychologistis that, there's two things that realy do people in
Three
Lying, that's not good
Apart from that:  resentment
And arogance!
If you get resenful enough
You and up like Eliot Rogers
And all those other people who go on  rundom shootings sprees
Because they have a disagreement about the structure  of existence
And the fact that they anded up hypothetically at the bottom of the heap
So those are real places and people gets stuck in them, and they are not places that you would
Voluntarily choose to go if you had any sens  at all
And I tell you if you read the accounts
Of the people who do rundom mass-murder
they will tell you exactly where they  are
And they will tell you exactly what they motivated to do
And what they motivated to do is take as much revenge on existence as they possibly can imagine
In the most unfaire possible way
As fast as they can possibly manage it
And that's the conscious aim and is not a form of insanity
They know exactly what they're doing
They have precisely idea what are they aiming at
And it's a deep archetypal
Posession
Per lack of a better word
Now
I wanna show you how some of this things are maped
Symbolically
They're not realy symbols, in my estimation, because  a symbol implies
That something is being
Represented
You know, there is reality  behind the representation that's broader than the representation
And the symbol is just a shadow of it
This aren't symbols
They're representations that are exact  as they can possibly be
I'll start with something that is rather easy to understand
Lets try
Yes!
what happends when you look at the Medusa?
You turn to stone!
What happends when a rabbits sees a wolf?
That's right, it turns  to stone
That's right, the Medusa
Is a symbol
It's a representation
Of all those things that make you turn to stone when you look at them
Now look!
Animals can deal with treat
Right?
They have instincts to deal with treat
But zebras, maybe there is a bunch of zebras then they out there in herd
And
There is a bunch of lions and they right there
And the zebras : what are they doing ?
They graizing.
And you think: "Whow! Those zebras aren't very bright because there is a bunch of lions
Like why aren't they , you know, in the forest building a fort to keep the lions out
But, the reason they're not doing that is because although they can react to threat
They can not conceive of the class of threatening objects
Now human being can conceive of the class of threatening objects
And so, what's civilization is in a large part is an attempt
To find the remedy for the class of threatning objects
Now there are representations of those sorts of things
The Medusa is one of them
The reason is feminine is very difficult to explainand I don't think Ihave the time  unfortunately
But you have to take my word for it
You see the little cartoon of Robert Crumb after a left there?
Hi's got a big Oedpal problem
Old Rob Crumb
And the problem with him fundamentaly is
That his mother was something like a gigant spider and did everything what she possibly could to cross the  life out of him
Hence his remining relationship with women
And so thats partly the reason why femininity can be
Something that's turnes you to stone
It's an experiemce that many man are familiar with  by the way
Because the average man is rejected far more often then he is accepted
And since women are the gateway to reproduction
They constitute nature itself
And nature itself tells most man
That you should go home and stay under your bed
There is lots of experiments done about this so for example
Psychologists have undergraduated woman go out into the concours
And see how long it takes someone - her to find someone to agree to sleep with her
And that takes , you know
Two seconds after she asks the first man
And then
And then they flip it!
You know, and they get randome undergraduate guy to do the same things
and you can imagine the consequences of that
Since many of you man have lived through it
Mother nature
Well, the woman weares the face of Mother Nature
And the face is generaly rejecting
Especialy the man who are lower on the dominance hierarchy by the way
Which is one of the things that irritates guys like Elliot Rogers
And one of the things that motivates  their desire to take revenge
That's the universal phenomena
So that's part of the reason that
The feminine is nature and why nature by the way is Mother Nature
It's like
It's diagnosis of your status is not good enough
And no wonder
What seams to have happend fundamentally
Is that this domains that  I talked to you about
Which can be represented as Chaos and Order
We say in our, fom the Daoist's perspective, can also be represented as musculine and feminin
And I think the reason for it is that
Human beings their fundamentally social primates, right?
We're very very social
And we know that one of the corelates of brain size in primates is social group size
And we also know that  the most primates, say chimps who we are quite closely related to
They don't like go out and invenstigate  leaves and you know pear at things through the microscope
they spend all their time interacting with other chimpanzies
Although they chewing all the time , they have to do it because they have a rediculously inefective
You know, digestive and eating system
Their brain is adapted
To the social circumstances as the primary reality so you could say
Well tribe is the primary reality and there is the secondary reality which is all that wich is outside tribe
And that's corresponds to Chaos and Order
Order in contradiction to Chaos is symbolised by masculine symbols
And that's for example why ideologies like radical feminism
Presume  the existence of a patriarchy
It fits in to a symbolic structure of our minds that idea
And it is true in some sense because
Just like a chimpanzie troups, the proper primary or metahierarchy
That makes up human civilization is fundamentaly masculine in its origin  and structure
And so, masculine is fundamentaly the dominance hierarchy
And feminine is fundamentally all the things
That are outside or the chalenge the dominance hierarchy
And so, it is the perfectly reasonable...its wierd...
Because our brain is organised to
Fundamentaly aprechend world in terms of the personalities
And that's partly because , you know
As we emerged of over the course of evolution
It's been relatively constant that there are males around and the there were females around
And then the males were fathers and the females were mothers
And , you know , they were both mates as well
That's the constant of the evolutionary landscape
And that's what our brain evolved to process
And then what happened when we develop the capacity to abstruct is we use this underlying
Social cognitive abstraction  structure to start to represent the structure of being itself
so we can say: "Well, there is dominance hierarchy and that's society
And that's masculine and there is all the things that challenge the dominance hierarchy
And they're outside and they are feminine
The weirdest thing about that however
Is that it actually works
You know, we've got away with that for some reason which seams to be practicaly reasinable
To map the world in that manner
It keeps us going
All right, I'm gonna try to explain this
This is now chemical symbol
At the bottom of this symbol
There is this round thing with wings
Do you ever see Harry Potter ?
Ye...
You know the game "Quidditch"
You remember what they chase?
They chase the gold one of those
All right, so...
They call that the snitch I believe
And there is a little fragment of soul in
It's very interesting idea because
For the alchemists the primary element of reality
Whatever that was could be conceptualised as this thing
This round Chaos
And what is was conceptualised of, in part, was
It was a container from which matter and spirit could emerge
And you might ask "What does that mean?"
This is what it means:
When a child experiences something it can't predict
It does the thing that led to that
Uncertain outcome
Over and over and over and over
Until it can map it
And than you think "What will the child do?"
What the child did was take the domain of that which it did not understand
And it transformed it into matter, which is the predictable world of entities and spirit
Which is the internal pssychological structure that is adapted to that
And so, whats the alchemists basically conceptualised was that
What exists outside of your conceptual framework is something like
Unrealised potential
And when you interact with that unrealised potential you actualise it
And you actualise it in to two component elements
One being:the material world and the other being
You own psychological structure
That's why they conceptualised matter and spirit
The container of matter and spirit as the ultimate reality
And out all of that emerged something that was quite primodial
Which is the dragon
Now...
One of the things we know
Remember the Genesis story?
It's the snake that gives people vision
Remember that?
It gives them wisdom and also produces self-consciousness
There is women named Lynne Isbell, who is the anthropologist in LA
And she was very interested in human being's  sight
Because we can realy see
We can see better than any other creature, exept predatory birds
We can see way better than most primates
Is thou  new that our tree dwelling ancestors, some 60 million years ago
Emerged at about the same time as snakes
Thery're younger...
than lizards, by the way
And than we were preyed on quite intensely by snakes for tens of millions of years
She also knew that we were good at detecting snakes at the bottom of our visual field
And that we were particulary good at detecting
The camouflage patternes of snakes at the bottom of our visual field
So, she did a series of field experiments showing that
Primate visual acuity was
Correlated strongly with the presence of preditory snakes in the immediate enviroment
So...
The idea that snakes gave us vision
Is right !
Now, why is that relevant to this?
We were prey upon for a very long period of time and we developed
A neural circuit to deal with predators
And that's the neural circuit that is activated in children ... when they are terrified
About monsters at night
So...
The predator entity
Which is this dragon
It's like a ...like amalgam of the predatory forces
Is one of the manifestations of the things that exist outside of the dominance hierarchy
So, it's a ...it's a form of primodial reality
It's not abstract any more, like the matter and spirit container
It's like the first practical manifestation of what's terrifying and treatning
Concretly  outside that
And so..
Remember ...
Animals can respond to treat
But they can't conceptualise treat as a category
That's the conceptualsation of treat as a category
It emerges absolute unknown
It manifest itself as treat
So, for example ...
If you hear a loud noise behind you or a growl when you're in the forest
The first thing that happends is you don't know what's going on
And that's initial states of contact with potential
And then when you turn around
And you look that potential manifest itself in to something that predatory
And you have a circuit for that!
And that's the same circuit that we now use to assess anything unexpected that occurs to us
And like that circuit have to come from somewhere
And so, our capacity to respond to surprising entities
Is elaboration and elaboration up into abstraction of our capacity to identify predators
So that's the next level of reality
And out of that
Chaotic circumstance, comes something that's more human, and...
...That is the emergence of
Masculinity and femininity, and out of that, more primodial element
Let me show you
Two things
This is a map of ...
...pragmatic teritory
As far as I can tell
Is the teritory that people actually inhabit
At the first level , thats the square, I call that The Dragon of Chaos
That's the unknown as such
And it's the thing that you fall in to when your conseptual schemes fall epart
What manifest itself out of that is...
Femininity
And femininity comes in two forms
One is benevolent femininity
Example would be
This
You see Mary on the left there
She is in the structure called a Meandorla
Which is from a freudian perspective
Has obvious
Sexual conotations
You see, if you look carefuly, that she's standing on the reptile
and holding her child away from it
It's a comon midieval christian image
And you can think of it as divine because woman spent an awful lot of time doing that
with their children over the course of our milions of years of evolution
And it's something that's sacred because our species depended on that
For its...for its survival!
This is even better
This is the medieval image, I love this image
So there is Mary with the Christ child and she is standing again on a reptile
A predatory reptile
But in the background you see all those weird little shapes?
Those are musical instruments
And there they fill the space
And the medivialartist who drew this picture
Had this intimation
That...
Behind the manifestation of something as primary as...
The protective maternality of Mary was...
Something like the music of the spheres or a colection of harmonious patterns
And at this figure was constantly emerging out of that background of harmonious patterns
Across the infinite stretches of time itself!
That's...
It's a sacred image because it represent something that human society can not live without!
It's like...Any society that doesn't regard the Virgin and the Child
Who protects the child from the predatory serpent
Has prime element of sacred reality
Is going to make itself extinct!
You know ...I could say for example
That that's what happening to the endogenous population of Eastern Europe at the moment
where the birth rate is far below replacement
I'm gonna show you another image
This is called the (................) or "open Virgin "
And this was a common representation in...
Midieval Europe , and it's weird representation
From a christian perspective
Because its , kind of, reverses that normal hierarchy of power
What you have here is
Mary
She's holding the Christ child when the statue is closed
And then you open her up
What you see inside Mary is God the Father
And God the Father is holding
Christ
In his hands
Now....
Mary constitutes the super ordinate benevolence permanent
Inside her is the structure of culture
So you can think: inside nature is the structure of culture
And that's represented in this image by God
Because he is the ultimate Father, obviously
In christian thinking, and than
The God figure is holding what?
Crusified individual
What is that mean?
Now...
All the people around there: kings, queens, commoners
Are all gazing at that central figure
Which of course is fundamentally what
Everyone in western civilisations has been doing for two thousand years
Not knowing why!
Nature gives rise to the culture
Culture gives rise
to the suffering individual
O! That's true enough
It's true for every one
It's true for life every point in time
But there is more to the image of the crucifiction
Because the crucifiction also represents
Voluntarily acceptance of suffering
And volutarily acceptance of death
And it also points to something else that's a paramount importance which is that
There is an element of the human psyche that can die
And Come back!
And die and come back and that's what happends to you
When you encounter a catastrophy
And you make horror of it, and you climb back out of the underworld
And you...your vojage through life is punctuated by trips to the underworld
And so, you are somwhere and then you go outside of that and then you go somewhere else
and you go outside that
And so what happends to people is they generaly identify with where they are
Order
But Order just dissolve and colapses
and then reconstitutes itself
so then you might say
"If you are trying to adapt to the structure of reality itself
instead of identifying with Order
You would identify with the process that allowed you to transform yourself
Across repeated bouts or Order and Chaos
And thats what this sort of images are trying to represent
Let me show you
One final idea
There is the Dao's idea that is like this
So the Dao's symbol, you know the Dao's symbol?
I already talked to you about it, you,ve all seen it
Chaos and Order
Masculine and feminine
Constantly
In inter play
That's
Dao!
From the daoist perpective
and Dao is the source of meaning
So the idea that there is the constant interplay between chaos and order
that produces the sense of meaning in human beings
And that's true!
That is what produces the sense of meaning
You know that because when you engage in a compeling operation
you're partly ordered than secured and you have one foot out into the unknown
And the balance is proper
And as a consequence you're engaged in what you're doing
And as  consequence of that you loose yourself consciousness
And if you stay engaged in that sort of situation
On a continual basis then you find that your life is meaningfuland rich
And that is the best antidote to the fact that life is bounded and full of suffering
Now...
Dao means meaning and also means jurney
And the center of the Dao is the place  you're suppose to be
One foot in chaos and one foot in order
And thats the best place to be in the actual enviroment itself
because the actual enviroment is better construde than the constant danger play
between chaos and order than it is construde as a colection of the material objects
And if you adopt the pragmatic view
that points out that
There are metarealities above the miere objects that we percieve
You can also apprehend that our brains are actualy adapted
To the metarealities and not the realities
Because our brains are like
3 hundred million years old
And what we've done is abstracted out those things that are constant across
strands of times
Strand of times that are hundred millions years in lenght
and those are'nt chairs and tables or automobiles
They are metastructures that are much more sophisticated than that
and we ignore that at our perilbecause modern people don't believe  that meaning exist
They think it's myth
Epiphenomal
There is nothing subjective about our world view
where in fact our nervous systems are tuned
so that life is manifesting itself in the most meaningful possible way
when you happend to be occuping the precise position between chaos and order
that maximases your  security
and the developement of that security across time
and that's not
that's the most realthing there  is and to stay in that positionis also to accept voluntarily
the necessity for a certain degree of suffering
because as you extend your capacitys
by exposing yourself to the optimal level of the unknown
You're constantly taking yourself apart and rebuilding yourself
and that's what allows you to trive not only in the present self stability
But also in a state that consists
of the transformation of that stability
Here is the representation from ancient Egypt
Thise are the representations of Horus
There is a lot of evidence that many of the ideas we have about Christ are derivative of Egyptian ideas
Most people who point that out
point it out in the manner that, saying that's devaluing the ideas that we're derive from Egipt
Because they have a priority motive
Which is the distractive motive
As mitology progreses across the centuries its transforms itself
And it tends to continually encapsulate, re-encapsulate
The primary ideas that the human race is managed to produce  both the structure and reality itself
There are constantcies across this cultural
manifestations because the reality to which they referes actually reality
Horus
This is the good lesson and I leave you with this
Horus is the eye
The eye is not the intelect!
The intelect is the thing that forces everything into the pre-existing structure
And it crunches reality to do that
It works it and twists it
And it makes people ideological and rigid
The eye is something comletely different
The eye is the thing that pays attention
And your attention is automaticaly directed
To those elements of your experiencial field
When the most information it's manifesting itself
That's why for example if you're talking to someone in the bar
And there's TV flickering you can't help butlook at the TV
The change, the transformation is what your nervous system is atuned to
And the teory is that if you are a follower of Horus
Who's the eye and the falcon, because falcons can see and they fly above everything else
If you are a follower of Horus you pay attention
When you pay attention you absorbe information
when you absorb information you continually
Transform yourself
And that keeps you on top of that ever shifting reality
Doing that is meanningful
And that's what stops you from becoming bitter and cruel
Because, you know, life is suffering
And if you don't have an antidote to that suffering that's real
Then you become resentful about the structure of experience
And then you do everything you can to take revenge on it
And we saw what happened when people get that in the  twentieth century
And it would be a good thing if people won't happend stop doing it
And as far as I can tell after trying to figure this out for, like ...
thirty years
The way that you do that
Is by paying attention
And transforming yourself when it's neccesary
And stoping the proces of identifying
With what you already believe
who the hell cares what you believe ?
You should be attending to the things you don't know
Which is a much larger space than the things you know
And then you should be construing yourself not as the inhabitant
of a sterile and static, and already completed
structure
But as the thing that lives on the edge of that
That's constantly building and re-building it
and then if something happends to your structure
it's not so relevant because thats not what you are!
you are the thing that can engage in transformation of structure
by paying attention
and that's what thise representations mean
this are Renaissance pictures , you know, they elevated
the entity that voluntarily accepted the necessity of suffering and  death
So that's represented by Christ
to the highest position in the heavenly hierarchy
what that idea means is that what should constitute the transcended value
that sits above all other values
is your capacity to voluntarily accept the restricted and painful conditions of your life
to face them
And as a consequence of facing them immediately transcend them
and one of the things we know from clinical psychology
is that if you have someone who is afraid
they aviod
so what do you do about that?
you brake down the things they are afraid of
till you find the small unit that they can approach
When they approach it they learn that they can approach it
and that they're more than they thought they were
and they can approach the next thing
and than the next thing so you take a women whos got agarophobia who can't get into an elevator
and week later she can and then she goes home and has the fight with her husband that she should had twenty years ago
adn the reason for that is that when she is exposed to the things that she's afraid of
insted of running from them
she learns that she is the thing that can be exposed to thing she's afraid of
she doesn't learn that things aren't frightning
and learning the  thing  she's is the thing that can be exposed to things that are frightning
makes her more than the  frightning things
and is certenely possible that we 're more than the things that frightened us
if we weren't we wouldn't be here
we shouldn't throw this things away before we understand them
and we're in danger of doing that now
so part what I was trying to do with my lecture and my work is to poin out
what our...
forefathers knew
to try to help modern people understand it and to make pace that this things that we think of as
non-real representations are more real then enything that we currently comprehend as a real
that consequences of not comprehending them
And living by them as far as I can tell is that
things deteriorate
And they can deteriorate to the point
Where everything is intolerable for everyone
and that's seams to be
suboptimal destination
so...
thanks for the invitation
(clapping)