So if I’m in a competitive game and I havesome information about reality, the reality
of the playing field that I’m in then thatinformation can be a source of strategic competitive
advantage against whoever I’m competingagainst and so I have an incentive to withhold
that information from other players and maybeeven disinform the other players.
So we see this is actual games.
This is bluffing in poker.
This is fake left and go right in soccer,football.
But we also would see this in keeping theknowledge to ourselves of where the water
is or where the goal is from another tribeor another kingdom or whatever and maybe even
trying to throw them off the scent trail withan intentional leaked fake treasure map that
has them going the wrong direction so theydon’t accidentally discover what we discovered.
Things like that.
So within a rival risk context where informationis strategic competitive advantage there is
an incentive to disinform.
And as we get increasing information technologywhich is media technology and computational
technology and statistics and all these thingswe have, we really have exponential information
processing but applied to disinformation,the incentive to disinform we have exponential
disinformation capacity which means the abilityto customize inflammatory, fake news, propaganda,
narrative warfare to specific demographicsand all the way down to specific types of
people that are the types that are most likelyfor that person to believe, be upset by, affect
their actions.
So we see with social media platforms likeFacebook the capacity to be able to target
the things that are going to be the stickiestfor an individual and the stickiest often
is by appealing to limbic hijacks of whatis scariest to them or hits addiction buttons
the most or creates a sense of ingroup-outgroupdynamic or things like that.
So when you think about having a society thathas an incentive to both withhold information
and to disinform and you think about a hugenumber of different agents who all have increasing
disinformation capacities and you also thinkabout the radical asymmetry between an individual
just trying to make sense of the world anda huge platform like Facebook or Google or
a company that is doing split test, optimizedmarketing you have an asymmetric information
warfare of the largest powers in the worldwith agendas that are not the same as the
agenda of the individual for themselves beingput forth on radically powerful information
technology platforms.
So you look at the world today and whetherit’s climate change or whether it’s what
the extent of the damage at Fukushima is orwhat the actual tactical capabilities of North
Korea are or how long we actually have withcoral die off or most any of the things that
are the most critical issues in the world.
What goal other countries or what effect othercountries had in influencing U.S. elections.
No one really knows the most important thingsclearly to be able to inform good choice-making
even about how we survive as a species.
So this is critical when we’re trying tounderstand the current information ecology.