You know, when a computer starts up, it hasto boot – bootstrap, is what that means.
And that boot straps itself by continuingto engage in more and more complex processes
as it starts up.
So, it starts up with a simple process, andthat triggers a more complex process.
And that triggers a more complex process,and that way, the computer boots itself into
existence.
Well, that’s exactly what we did, exceptwe did it over like three billion years, right?
We started out as these unbelievably simpleorganisms that can pretty much do nothing
at all, except replicate and develop muchmore and more complex forms over this tremendously
long period of evolutionary history, right?
So, that’s how we solved the problem thatyou can’t know anything without knowing
something, and that you can’t have knowledgewithout generating it.
It’s: A little knowledge, a little moregeneration.
A little knowledge, a little more generation.
A little knowledge-- this huge spiraling processthat expends-- extends over vast amounts of
time; information encoded in your body, right,and as part of your-- as part of the nature
of your being; and information encoded inyour culture, reflected inside, you enacted
out in the world.
And as scientists, you know, with this 500-yearhistory of science behind us, we always believe
that it’s the material substrate of thingsthat’s the reality.
But it is more complicated than that, becauseeven the material substrate that we consider
as scientists isn’t merely unformed stuff,right?
It has structure.
It’s patterned.
It’s full of information, and there arephysicists working now who believe that conceptualization
of the ground of being – the material grounduh, of being – as information is a more
fruitful metaphor than conceptualization ofthe ground of being as like unformed matter.
It’s not unformed, right?
It’s patterned and regular.
Informative so that if you investigate it,it reveals order as not just a material structure.
So, if you go back to Democratus, right, theperson who originated the atomic hypothesis,
Democratus actually says two things – notone.
He says: Everything’s made out of atoms– little bits of stuff.
But the other thing he says is: Atoms arraythemselves in space array themselves-- And
what that means is that the atomic structureof things is patterned, and that the pattern
is just as real as the atoms themselves.
It’s the pattern that’s the knowledge,right?
It’s the pattern that’s the information.
So, what we encounter as conscious beingsis this complexly patterned array, which we
then turn into knowledge – useable knowledge.
I said: Well, how would this metaphoricalrepresentation work?
And so uh, the way I want you to look at thisfigure is like this: Imagine this as distant,
right, as lurking in the background.
So, this is the ground of all being manifestingitself as one primordial archetype, or one,
one metaph-- one standard motive metaphoricalrepresentation.
Why this figure?
Well, this is complicated, I think.
If you show men a picture of a beautiful womanwith her eyes averted, while you’re doing
a brain scan mapping of their nucleus accumbens,nothing happens.
Why is that relevant?
Well, the nucleus accumbens is part of theunderlying emotional circuitry that governs
approach behaviour and pleasure.
And approach behaviour and pleasure are verytightly intertwined.
If you show the same man a picture of a beautifulwoman with her eyes locked on his, his nucleus
accumbens will light up.
Why is that?
Well, it’s partly because men are innatelyin-- attuned to hu-- to female beauty.
Female beauty has a standard form.
It’s replicable cross-culturally.
It constitutes the average human… humanfemale form.
But more than that, the gaze-locking is anindication of shared attention.
And it’s also the indication of the initialestablishment of a shared attentional space.
And it’s an invitation, and that invitationactivates approach circuitry, even if it’s
just a picture.
So, and you can see this if you walk intoany drug store, or any-any s-- any drug store
that sells magazines.
What do you see?
Well, in the men’s magazines, you see aninfinite array of beautiful women.
And in the female magazines, the women’smagazines, you see an infinite array of beautiful
women.
Now, just exactly why is that?
Well, there’s something absolutely compellingabout female beauty.
And then, you have to ask yourself: What thehell does compelling mean?
OK, so what compelling means is: You’rebusily engaged in a goal-directed task and
something happens in your peripheral vision,so to speak, that attracts your attention.
Now, that attention is attracted by processesthat are fundamentally unconscious; which
means, processes that occur before you canthink.
So, you can imagine a loose collection ofcollege-aged males having a conversation in
a bar, when someone beautiful walks by.
And one or more of them catch her out of thecorner of their eyes.
Orientation, right?
Unconscious.
Why?
Because there’s something about that patternform that grips attentional systems and directs
observation towards it.
So then, you think: OK.
Human beings are really, really complicatedpattern processors.
And you think: Well, partly what we’re tryingto get a handle on here is the nature of the
world.
And partly what we know already is that thereare aspects of the world that you can’t
understand always.
And then, you think: Well, people are tryingto get a grip on the fact that there are parts
of the world that you can’t understand.
So, that there’s this transcendant elementto being that always escapes encapsulation.
How would you represent it?
Well, it’s the transcendent element of thingsthat always attracts your attention, implicitly,
beyond your control.
So, loud noise or a scream, or the cry ofa baby or anything horrific, right?
Blood, broken bodies…
These are stimuli that are so representativeof trouble that you can’t help but attend
to them.
And then, you can imagine that all the stimuli,so to speak, that you can’t help but attend
to, can be amalgamated into representationsof… the transcendent aspect of reality.
And that’s what you see in this representationright here.
So, you see a weird intermingling of femalesexuality, plus some very distinct genital
symbolism.
Why genital?
So, imagine that that’s a vulval opening.
Why?
Before we had any scientific knowledge atall-- let’s go 10,000 years ago.
What the hell’s inside a body?
Well, we knew that, I guess, a little bitfrom hunting, right?
We knew the interior of a body.
What is it about the interior of a body thatallows new forms to be generated?
How is it that mothers can give birth to children?
How is it that one form, that’s complexand attractive and mysterious, can give rise
to another form?
Why is that useful knowledge from a representationalperspective?
Because there’s some association betweenthe feminine form from a metaphorical perspective,
and the capacity for nature to give rise tonew forms.
And then you see a representation of a typicalmonstrous form that’s Kali the Hindu goddess
the devourer and in this representation soshe’s like a more developed version of Tiamat
that’s a good way of thinking about her.
She's not so much unspeakable anymore, youcan actually say a few things about Kali,
you could say well she’s like a spider becauseshe has 8 legs and she weaves a web of fate
and you could say well her web is made outof fire because if you get too near to her
you'll burn up.
And you could say she glares at you with eyesthat are unblinking and you could say she
has a tongue like a tiger and you could saythat she carries weapons of destruction and
has a headdress of skulls and that her hairis on fire.
And you could say that she’s giving birthto this guy as nature gives birth to human
beings and is devouring him at the same time.
Intestines first.
And then you could say well you could imaginethat the first few people that made a representation
like that shocked themselves quite badly,right because this is a this is a representation
of fear itself in a sense not exactly it’salso a representation of those stimuli that
if you're human are going to make you bothafraid and compelled just like it’s hard
to look away from fire even if it’s burningsomething down, you want to have it around.
Rats if you raise a rat to juvenile statusand then waft in cat odour it will completely
short circuit, why?
Well the rat’s never seen a cat so exactlywhat the hell is it responding to you think
well you could say well it’s not a conditionedstimulus because the rat’s never encountered
a cat there's something deep in the brainof that rat that knows something about cat
odour has never encountered a cat so exactlywhat is it perceiving well in some sense I
think the notion that it’s perceiving iswrong it isn't perceiving, it’s just going
like this.
That’s the representation.
Well with chimpanzees who are more complexthere are other stimuli that evoke exactly
that kind of response chimps don’t likesnakes.
Dead or alive plastic rubber doesn’t matterthey don’t like snakes if you put one in
their cage they get as far away from the snakeas they can as quickly as possible and then
they look at it.
Because I suppose if you're a chimpanzee evenif you don’t like snakes it’s a good idea
to know where they are right so it’s simultaneouslyrepelling -- Ahh snake! -- plus attractive
well you better look at it and see where it’sgonna go.
Chimpanzees don’t like unconscious chimpanzeesso if you knock a chimpanzee out with anesthetic
and you bring the body of the chimpanzee backinto the chimpanzee cage the chimps do exactly
the same thing away from the body but theylook at it they don’t like masks made of
chimpanzee faces.
Well 3 year old kids don’t like masks either.
there are these underlying perceptual primitiveso to speak that likely activate lower limbic
mechanisms in our brains that say to us thisis a place suddenly where something that you
probably do not like or will not like is veryvery likely to happen so you can imagine that
an environment characterized by unconsciousbodies or blood or the presence of spiders
or snakes etcetera might be a place wherea primate such as yourself may encounter things
that they don’t know how to cope with thereforeafraid, right same with fear of the dark,
and then you can imagine that the dark ispopulated with all of these monsters of the
unknown and you get some notion of what'shappening to children who are afraid of the
dark, why are they afraid of the dark.
Because in the dark which is the place youdon’t know lurk things that could hurt a
creature like you.
What things.
Well we can’t exactly say, but if you givechildren exposure to books and to adult conversation
and the television soon those limbic structuresthat are populating the darkness with unnamable
fear start to populate it up with skeletonsand vampires and monsters and so forth and
so on.
the representational structures that the brainis capable of generating say well fear-inducing
things are like that they're bloody they'redangerous they look like serpents they look
like insects they lurk in the dark they sneakup on you etc. all mangled together into some
sort of monstrous form.
Now I wanna read you a story.
So lemme give you a little background on thisstory.
This story popped into my head in one chunklike complete which I thought was kind of
interesting but… it was also a story thatemerged in solution to a problem I’d been
thinking about for a long time because I wasdealing with this guy who didn't wanna grow
up, so he’s caught in a kind of Peter Pansituation and Peter Pan, pan means everything,
pan like pantheistic.
And Peter Pan is a child who won’t growup now he’s magical well okay fine children
live in the magical world right they're ripewith possibility, he’s magical.
He doesn’t wanna grow up.
So he lives in Neverland with the lost boys,Neverland doesn’t really exist and the lost
boys are obviously boys who haven't managedto establish some mode of being and he’s
in constant battle with Capt. Hook and Capt.Hook’s a tyrant right a pirate a negative
a manifestation of the negative archetypeof social order.
Hook is always fighting Peter Pan becausePeter Pan represents childhood and vulnerability
and he doesn’t wanna be vulnerable so they'relocked in this sort of eternal battle.
and lots of people I think more commonly menbut not necessarily, get caught in this Peter
Pan problem
So I was dealing with a person who was caughtin this situation didn't wanna grow up wouldn’t
sacrifice childhood.
And so this story popped into my head.
It’s called Cockadoodledo
Once upon a time there was a man who had along hard journey ahead of him.
He was trudging along the way over watersand through brushes when he saw little shiny
gnome with big white teeth and a black toupeesitting by the side of the road.
He was drumming on a log.
With two white bones and humming oddly tohimself.
The little gnome said John, why work so hardwhy walk so fast.
Who knows if you'll ever get there anyway.
Come over here I have something to show you.
So John walked off the road.
He was sick of walking anyway because peoplekept throwing sticks and stones at him.
Little gnome said I have a shiny red jewelthat I would like to sell you.
Cheap.
Here it is.
And from beneath his cloak he pulled the biggestruby that the man had ever seen.
Must’ve weighed 100 pounds and shone likethe sun.
The gnome said, do you like it.
It’s an enchanted stone, what will you offerme for it.
And the man said.
I don’t have much, much money but I’llgive you everything I have.
And the gnome looked displeased.
So John added I could pay some more monthly.
So the gnome accepted, fair enough buy nowpay later, sounds good for me, I'm all for
the installment plan.
So the man gave the gnome all his money andpromised to pay the rest later and the gnome
walked back into the bush by the road clackinghis teeth and giggling and twitching.
The more the man thought about this ruby andthe great deal he got the happier he became,
he started back on the road with a light heartbut soon discovered that he couldn't make
much progress because 100 pounds was a lotto carry.
He said to himself why continue anyways Ihave what I want, I’ll just stand here holding
my ruby and when people walk by they couldsee how well I've all ready done.
So he stopped.
A little while one of his little while laterone of his friends came along saw him standing
there.
His friend said John why don’t you comealong with me.
I've just opened a new business and I couldreally use some help, come along quick.
It will be opening soon.
John thought that sounded good.
But his friend was in a hurry.
Besides couldn't he see the ruby?
How could he speed along beside him wherewould he put his jewel.
So he said thanks but I have to take careof my jewel.
Maybe I’ll see you later.
His friend looked at him like he was crazybut he was trying to get somewhere quick so
he just shrugged a bit and said okay Johnsee you later.
And he sped on down the road.
Little while later another friend came byand he said John nice to see you.
I'm going back to school.
There are lots of wonderful things to learn,great things to do.
The world is full of unsolved problems.
I could use some company.
Would you like to come along.
John thought that sounded pretty good butthis friend too looked like he was in a hurry.
Besides standing beside the road holding thejewel was tiring and he needed all the energy
he had for that.
So he said to his friend thanks but I haveto take care of my jewel.
Isn't it beautiful maybe I’ll see you later.
His friend looked at him like he was crazybut he was trying to get somewhere quick so
he just shrugged and said hope everythinggoes all right with you, see you later.
Many friends came and went and the years wentby.
The jewel got heavier and heavier.
But the man got more and more attached toit.
The only thing was nobody seemed to noticehow beautiful it was.
People would rush by and talk about theirplans and nobody had a ruby as big and nobody
seemed likely to get a ruby as big if you'dthink that someone might have said something
like at least nice ruby John sure wish I hadone like that but it never happened.
Then one day someone new came down the road,he was bent over and he was thin and his hair
was gray, although he didn't look that old.
He was carrying a big dirty rock carefullyin his arms and he wasn’t making much progress.
The strange figure approached and glancedup at John, then he grinned and said, why
are you standing there so stupidly with abig ugly rock in your tired old hands.
You look pretty daft.
I bet you wish you had a big ruby like theone I'm carrying and John thought this poor
man is deluded, he’s carrying a rock.
I have the ruby so he said excuse me sir butyou were sadly mistaken.
I'm the one with the jewel I met a littlegnome by the side of the road and he sold
it to me.
I’m still paying for it.
Although not so very much, you are carryinga rock.
The tired stranger looked annoyed said I don'tknow what game you're playing mister you have
a rock I have a jewel.
Little gnome you described sold it to me.
And he said it was the only one.
I've been carrying it for 20 years.
And I’ll never let it go.
And John said but I'm been carrying mine for20 years too, it can’t be just a rock.
Rock or jewel on and on they argued.
Suddenly out stepped the little gnome as ifhe’d never left.
Only this time he wasn’t so little he wasbigger and redder and menacing and his laugh
sounded like the rattling of chains.
Quit arguing you two.
I've never seen a sight quite so pathetic.
You're carrying rocks, both of you.
And if you would've ever had the sense toput them down for a second or two you would've
seen that.
Oh well at least you were diligent.
I played a mean trick.
I feel bad.
So I'm gonna give you what you really deserve.
Do you want what you really deserve?
And John and the thin stranger nodded eagerly,finally they thought.
You haven't seen anything yet.
Throw down your rocks.
So John and the thin stranger obeyed.
Each rock split down the middle and it hitthe ground, out flowed a river of ravenous
white worms which rushed towards the men anddevoured them whole while they thrashed about
and screamed.
Soon nothing was left except a legbone fromeach.
The little gnome picked them up and walkedoff the road.
He sat down by a hollow log and started todrum.
He drummed and he waited.
And he hummed an odd little tune.
Picture of food feeds the whole hungry clan,the image of good makes the whole healthy
man, why walk for miles why do the work, justsmile the smile, success after all is a quirk,
life isn't real that’s the message I give.
It’s easy that way, plus who wants to live?
So needless to say the guy that I was tellingthis story to never listened to it and things
really didn't go well for him for a long,long time, and they really didn't go well
for him until he was willing to give up someof the things he was carrying along so he
had acquired for example a number of thingsthat he couldn't afford.
And the fact that he was carrying them rightpaying for them month after month, meant couldn't
afford to get an education was perfectly willingto sacrifice the possibility of getting an
education for the image of success.
Rather than the reverse right and he was completelyirritated at the world because he had all
these trappings of success which no one headmired also admired and he absolutely wasn’t
getting anywhere and he thought that was tremendouslyunfair.
But the truth of the matter was that had heput down what he was carrying for even a moment
and he would've been able to get to wherehe wanted to go.
And that’s a motif that succinctly and dramaticallydescribes the necessity for sacrifice.
Now one of the things you see in psycho therapyvery very commonly is that the person who’s
coming for help does the same damn thing overand over and over and every time they do it,
it has the same consequence.
Bad.
So they end up with the same kind of theyend up in the same kind of relationship.
Right starts out well then the person turnsagainst them and starts to abuse them they
get abused repeatedly then it ends then theymeet someone else and the cycle continues
doesn’t seem to matter who they're out witheither they pick a person like this or they
turn the person into someone like that theylose jobs the same way or their educational
hopes fail the same way, why, well the personthinks man… the structure of the world is
so unfair everyone else seems to be gettingalong just fine but me I get hit in the head
over and over.
Exactly the same way and then you think well…what is the structure of the world, exactly
and then you remember well you know there'sthe things you don’t understand and the
things you do understand and the things youdo understand structure you and protect you
but you know sometimes the things you do understandaren't the right things, you're valuing something
you're carrying something that’s an impedimentto your further progress and it’s frequently
the case that it’s the kind of impedimentthat under no conditions do you wanna give
up because there's something about you thatsays like John says about the ruby, look,
it’s a ruby, who the hell cares if it weighs100 pounds and I have to stand by the road
I still got the ruby, and all you'd ever haveto do is put the damn thing down and wander
off and everything would be just fine
but you won’t do it, why.
Because you don’t wanna give up what youknow.
Because you don’t wanna sacrifice anything.
Well, long before people had any psychologicalacumen or any psychological knowledge they
all ready figured out that if you were gonnatake on a figure like this and expect to get
absolutely anywhere with her right the horrorsof the world, you bloody well better be willing
to sacrifice whatever’s necessary to keepyou going along your path right unfortunately
the things that you have to sacrifice areoften those things that you're most particularly
compelled by or gripped by or value the thingsthat you wanna give up least.
Which is why in archaic societies where allthis is dramatized people sacrifice an animal
that they value particularly.
Or eerier than that even a child that theyvalue particularly right dramatically portraying
the idea of sacrifice you have to give somethingup if you wanna make an inroad on what she
represents.
And so then you say the purpose of sacrificeis to turn the terrible aspect of the world
into the benevolent aspect of the world andthis is Diana not a Hindu goddess but a Greek
a Roman goddess same idea applies in the Hinducase if you make the appropriate sacrifices
then the terrible aspect of the world turnsinto the benevolent aspect of the world.
And it is the case that even empirical studiesof success indicate that intelligence is a
handy thing to have, but hard work and dedicationis a handy thing to have too and what that
means is that you're constantly willing tosacrifice the impulsive pleasure of the present
for the hopes of payback in the future.
For example the sacrifice immediate gratificationto obtain an appropriate social role take
your place in society.
It’s definitely a sacrifice right becauseyou put off pleasures in the moment to obtain
long term stability and productivity.
To turn the world into this.
And so then you can say, this is how the worldfalls apart as it’s explored right so first
of all there's the thing that you can’teven name that only fills you with dread and
but also with the sense of possibility andthat manifests itself in your life as something
concrete.
That you don’t know promising and threateningand that divides itself up into those aspects
of the world that you value and admire andthat hold promise for you, and those aspects
of the world that don’t and that’s a differentiationas a consequence of exploration.
It’s not a differentiation of the worldinto objects though it’s a differentiation
of the world into categories of emotion, thosethings that are good for you those things
that are bad for you and the source that they'rederived from.
That’s the background of the world.
We'll stop!