Last time we talked about the state of the world of faith
 at the end of the nineteenth century. And I told you a little bit about Nietzsche
 and Dostoevsky and Kierkegaard.
 Many of the clinical theories we are going to discuss in the next two lectures,
 after this college, were influenced by philosophers, and that's why me
 will discuss the philosophers with you.
 It's as if the great philosophers are tuned in
 the deeper layers of our cultural meaning systems that evolve over time.
 And they can indicate how those structures work, and describe their weaknesses and strengths,
 and the changes they are likely to undergo as time goes on.
 Obviously, people can be behind, and it is equally likely that
 some people are ahead of their time. We can assume, if we think from
 the "Big Five" model, which the people who are ahead often
 are very intelligent, and very open. And that's a pretty good definition of a philosopher.

 Nietzsche and Dostoevsky, more than any other thinker, had their finger on the pulse
 of the change of cultural meaning systems at the end of the nineteenth century.
 They were both very concerned due to the fact that the systems of meanings within Western civilization
 formed, fragmented, for various reasons,
 the most important of which was probably the emergence of the scientific worldview.
 And as I explained in the previous lecture, both Dostoevsky and Nietzsche believed that
 the modern people because of that ... I think in the early twentieth century it was the western people,
 but I think now you can say it's about the modern people ... in a state of
 cultural discontinuity.
 Belief systems, as well as technological systems, have now changed the world so radically,
 that the conflict between modernity and traditional forms of faith is very strongly experienced,
 everywhere.
 I think that is certainly one of the forces that give rise to the struggle between
 Islamic Fundamentalism and Modernity. Because that is what it is, and not so much a struggle between Islamic fundamentalism
 and the western world. The basic problem is that people usually live
 in cultural constructions that are very old and well-founded
 in evolved systems of meaning, which are more profound than that which is articulated and explicit.
 And if there is a period of very rapid cognitive and technological change,
 then the integrity of those systems starts ... it gets questionable
 from an explicit perspective, but also insufficiently from a practical perspective.
 An example that you can consider is the introduction of the contraceptive pill.

 If you listen to politically minded people, they say that the empowerment of women,
 was essentially a political issue, but I don't think it's very reasonable to do it
 in that way.
 Of course, everything has a feedback loop, and there are different causal routes to an outcome.

 The important element in the emancipation of women was, of course, the development of trustworthiness
 forms of contraception, in particular the contraceptive pill.
 And once you educate women, anywhere in the world, it's not just economic productivity that goes
 up dramatically, it is in fact the best predictor of growing economic productivity
 in the modernization of a state, the granting of rights to women.
 Whether it is due to the granting of rights to women, or because of it
 the presence of an underlying belief structure that allows rights very quickly
 expanding is difficult to determine. But anyway, it is.
 In addition, women stop having children very quickly.

 For example, I think it's Iran where this has been most illustrative,
 the last two generations. From families much larger than needed for replacement to families
 that are much smaller than needed for replacement, in one or two generations.
 It's a very big change, and not something anyone expected.
 It is part of the developments that will quickly make our population peak,
 and after that it will stabilize or decrease.
 I don't know how many of you know this, but the predictions are there
 In thirty years to fifty years, there will be nine billion people on the earth, and that will be the culmination.

 Then it will decrease sharply, and you can see how that is happening right now,
 all over the West, and it's happening a lot in China, and it's happening in Japan,
 where there are more old people than young people.
 Because the young people don't have enough children to replace the population.
 So the probability that it will peak at around nine billion, and then decline ...
 it is not certain, but that is what the best predictions seem to indicate.
 What happens in times of great technological and cognitive change,
 because those things go together, that is the certainties on which people base their interpretation of the world,
 and more importantly, on which they base their judgment of how to act,
 become insecure.
 For example, if you introduce the contraceptive pill to a population,
 and making women's reproductive power voluntary, you change very radically
 almost all basic social structures, especially marriage.
 And marriage has traditionally been seen as the foundation of civilization.
 And there are more and more people who are not married than people who are.
 It's hard to interpret that because
 we can't turn back time, and it's not clear if that would be desirable,
 if possible. But expect cultural constructs that last for centuries, or maybe even
 thousands or tens of thousands of years, can keep up with such changes,
 of that size ... that is not possible.
 You are experiencing technological changes that are unimaginable,
 almost every year, and you hardly notice it.
 "Tinder" is a good example of this.
 I don't know if you guys know, but Tinder has produced a decent increase in STDs.
 It is a major technology because it is the first technology
 that was once invented that allows men to find partners without the fear
 to be rejected. That was a limiting factor ... that has been a characteristic
 of the interaction between men and women since the beginning of history.
 These things are happening at an incredible speed, and it is not reasonable
 to expect our slower cultural constructs to keep up.
 For example, people often talk about religion dividing people.

 You often hear critics of formal religion talk about the fact
 that religion would be responsible for a tremendous amount of destruction and war and conflict.
 This is not caused by religion, but by "tribalism,"
 and chimpanzees are also characterized by tribalism. And I don't think chimpanzees are at war
 with each other for religious reasons.
 The religious groups of humanity are manifestations on a grand scale,
 of the same phenomena that produce social hierarchies in the wild. And great religions unite people
 within that religion, in addition to dividing people, outside of religion.
 The accumulation of religious tradition over time is a process that has taken thousands, tens of thousands,
 and has even enabled millions of people to live within the same hierarchy of values.
 And to live relatively peacefully, as a result.
 I say "relatively peaceful."
 A hundred years ago it was thought that archaic peoples,
 peoples who still live quite isolated, in small tribes,
 which, in fact, are still alive at the Stone Age technological level ...
 There was a very popular idea, for a long time, that those cultures were communist,
 and knew no violence. That is not true.
 They were not at all free from violence.
 In Stone Age cultures, the amount of murders is much greater
 than in civilized cultures, the difference is significant. That has several reasons,
 but I'm telling you so that you let go of the idea that
 complex societies and the spread of unifying religious ideas,
 coincided with an increase in violence, because there is simply no evidence for that.

 The problem with these large-scale belief systems is that they are not very fast,
 because if a large-scale belief system wants to manifest itself,
 in a reasonable form, it must be based on the mutual agreement of the people
 operating within it.
 So for Toronto to exist as a peaceful city, what needs to be done is that
 the vast majority must agree that the rules that regulate the city and the social interactions
 in the city, be useful and just. 'Cause if you don't agree
 then all kinds of small groups will emerge, and people will be more revolutionary
 adopting courses of action. They will become more violent, and the whole system
 starts falling apart.
 It's not easy to set a collective norm because people have to agree.
 You can imagine agreeing on something, even with a small agreement
 that affects many people is a process that takes a very long time.
 People can discuss endlessly about the smallest changes in the systems that regulate our behavior.

 Some of you may be familiar with "terror management" theories.
 How many of you have heard about the "terror management" theory?
 Terror management theories are based on the idea that our belief systems are
 protect us from our fear of death.
 How exactly they do that is not well specified by the terror management theories,
 but the originator of the theory, Ernest Becker, who was a sociologist,
 and a Freudian, believed that cultural systems allow us to hold beliefs
 to link our actions, finite and infinite, so that we put ourselves in relationship
 to immortality, and thus escape the truth of the finiteness of our existence.
 Which the terror management theorists don't pay attention to
 is the fact that belief systems are not only systems of belief, but that they are systems
 of action regulation.
 We've talked about the Piagetian idea of ​​a game.
 The game first exists as something anyone can play, and only after that
 as something that people represent. And the same goes for a social culture.

 A culture regulates the way you interact with each other, and what you expect from each other,
 and how everyone can fulfill their needs in relation to each other,
 and then it is represented. And the representation can help you find meaning in your life,
 but the fact of the social contract to begin with, the phenomenon that you
 regulates interpersonal behavior, it does not protect you from the fear of death, it protects you from dying.
 And that is very important to note.
 You all know it's very cold outside today
 and yet you sit here in this classroom, ridiculously comfortable,
 for a classroom, and certainly compared to the rest of the world.
 You are not freezing to death here, and it is not your faith that protects you.

 It is the fact that you are embedded in this extraordinarily complex system of cultural interactions,
 and it just so happens that you can sit here and listen to a lecture,
 while thousands of people are busy, many out in the cold, causing that
 the electricity, for example, that keeps this place warm, is well maintained and functions,
 which requires an enormous amount of work.
 In times of rapid change, the social contract has difficulty adjusting itself
 so that everyone knows how to behave in relation to each other,
 but it is also very difficult to define it, the articulated standards that one
 society, it is very difficult to transform it fast enough so that it
 keep up with changes and help people decide what to do.
 An example.
 I had a client some time ago who was raised as a fundamentalist Christian.
 She was so socialized that she was convinced that premarital sex
 was wrong, but the odds of her getting married before she was twenty-seven or twenty-eight,
 was small, for several reasons.
 So she had this problem, and it was a very interesting problem from my perspective.
 Because ... I think that in a well-regulated psyche, sexuality is integrated into the personality,
 so that the self has its role in the administration of the self.
 It's well integrated inwardly, so it's under moral control,
 because it has its own function, and it also ensures that the person remains well situated
 in the present, will develop well in the future, and will maintain good relationships
 with all the people in the area. But it was pretty clear to me that a lot of the limitations
 imposed on her, as a result of her relatively rigid faith,
 disrupted her personal development.
 What we had to figure out was: which moral guidelines to use
 to regulate your sexual behavior outside of marriage, when you are newly planning to be married
 late twenties?
 Good luck if you have to find out.
 That is a very complicated question.
 It is not clear that any individual can solve that in a lifetime.
 Even if you wouldn't think of anything else, especially because of the environment
 keeps changing as you try to adapt.
 In the end, although it was a very individual solution, we concluded that
 there were things that she had forbidden herself and that prevented her
 to have long-term relationships. And that, that her development
 as an adult person disturbed. And that was the moral she had used to guide her behavior
 to structure, seemed counterproductive, at least in some areas.
 You can regulate your sexuality with the hope of marriage,
 if you get married when you're nineteen, twenty, or twenty-one.
 But it's a lot different if that isn't going to happen until
 you are in your late twenties.
 Nietzsche and Dostoevsky talked a lot about the collapse of systems of meaning
 at the end of the nineteenth century, and then a very fast one
 period of technological change, which really started in the late eighteen hundred.
 That was the height of the industrial revolution, in particular
 in England, and many modern technologies were created
 such as the car, the airplane, electric light, recording devices,
 and all the things we are still building on today.
 And in addition to the collapse of classical Christian faith, and the introduction of all these new technologies,
 World War I broke out, affecting the monarchical structure of the West
 collapsed, and so did the Ottoman Empire,
 which led to the creation of the modern Middle East,
 and that is still hardly in order.
 The monarchical structures collapsed, those ancient civilizations.
 The Russians underwent their revolution and turned into communists.
 And after World War I, the tension between the different ways of shaping society became,
 after the fall of the monarchies, almost unbearable. And the people did not know
 what to do.
 What happened at the end of Nietzsche's and Dostoevsky's period was that
 the question they both ...
 The main question that both had asked became the focal point
 in the development of philosophical ideas about ethics in the twentieth century.
 You can see that as post-religious ethics.
 I'm telling you that because
 much psychoanalytic or psychotherapeutic treatment revolves around ethics.
 That cannot be stressed enough, because ethics is about how you see the world, and how you
 you behave. Even behaviorists who are theoretically anchored in the scientific world
 are still practical ethicists. Because what they do structurally with their clients is
 analyze the problems they suffer from, subdivide them into subproblems,
 and try to find solutions that will improve their quality of life. Practical, implementable
 solutions that improve their quality of life, not only now, but also for the future,
 and that is not a scientific matter.
 That's a matter of how to live.
 So the whole history of the twentieth century, politically, economically, psychologically,
 was a series of attempts to answer the question, "If your fundamental ethical systems fall away,
 how are you supposed to live? "
 Nietzsche made it very clear that there would be two consequences, the disappearance of these systems.
 The first would be nihilism, believe in nothing, whatever he saw as
 a form of flight from responsibility. It is a natural consequence of the collapse of
 the classical belief systems, but it is also an escape. It's the kind of excuse that
 Dostoevsky had explored very deeply in his short brilliant novel "Notes from the Underground."
 In which he describes a person who ends up ... an intelligent person, and an irresponsible person,
 who has ended up in a black hole of meaninglessness, where he hates,
 bitterness and the desire for revenge, and all the things someone experiences
 would torment in the underworld, which has nothing to keep itself together.
 And Nietzsche also talked about the likelihood of people turning
 would turn to totalitarian belief systems, and he particularly discussed communism as a substitute
 for religious belief.
 I can give you a Canadian example of that.
 I once heard someone speak from "Gallup Poll".
 I was at a conference in Ottawa.
 It's the only time I've ever heard this, and I think it's an amazing fact.

 They looked at the likelihood that people would be separatists in Quebec.
 If you were an apostate Catholic, you were ten times more likely to be a separatist.
 The reason for that ... Catholicism fell apart in Quebec
 late 1950s.
 It was one of the last places in the West where feudal
 structures of Catholicism had survived up to that point,
 until the late 1950s. And that suddenly collapsed, just like faith
 in Christianity in Russia in late 1880. And what happened in Quebec ...
 in the first place, the birth rate fell dramatically.
 I did research in Quebec, and in the 1950s and before
 families with nine to thirteen children were very normal. But now Quebec has
 the lowest birth rate in the West, I think.
 It is much lower than necessary for replacement.
 Everyone left the church.
 Nobody gets married. And if you were a renegade Catholic
 you were ten times more likely to be a separatist.
 That means when Catholicism fell away, people still do
 highly structured belief systems, took nationalism as an obvious alternative.
 That explains the rigidity and utopian ...
 the utopian nature of the Quebec movement for independence.
 I remember talking to a colleague, a very intelligent person,
 I asked him about it because at the time they predicted that if Quebec seceded,
 the Canadian dollar would fall to forty cents, forty-five US dollar cents,
 something like that.
 That would be an economic disaster.
 I said, "They predict that if Quebec separates,
 and no one knows how to do that, then the Canadian economy will collapse,
 and the Quebec economy is going to collapse. ”And he did not deny that.
 He said, "Yes, but it's worth it."
 And I thought, "You just can't have a conversation that way."
 Because from my perspective, a total, or severe economic crisis, is a good reason
 to not do something. But if you believe the potential for the future is such,
 that, that is justified, then there is no talking to you.
 You just decided that, and that was it.
 When I lived in Quebec, where I lived for a long time, I quickly realized
 never to have a political discussion with a separatist, because that was complete
 counterproductive.
 They had fixed axioms like, "The future will be so good,
 that no matter what price we pay for it in the present, it'll justify that. "
 That is not an idea.
 That is an expression of faith. You saw the same thing happening ... not from the same principles,
 I'm not saying that, but you saw the same thing happening from a psychological perspective
 in Russia, when the communists really started to get active in the 1920s,
 and whatever terror was fully justified, because it
 bring about a future condition that would be paradise.
 Regardless, Dostoevsky went even further in his exploration of the idea of ​​nihilism,
 for Dostoevsky was someone who was willing to go to extremes in an argument.
 One of the things he stated was that if there is no god, then everything is allowed.
 His fundamental hypothesis was that if there is no final measure of values,
 no transcendent measure of values, then you are radically free.
 The existentialists would say you can use that radical freedom to
 to find meaning in your life, but what Dostoevsky realized was that you
 who can use radical freedom for whatever you want.
 For example, in his book "Guilt and Penance", he explores actions and beliefs
 from a student named Raskolnikov. And Raskolnikov is a starving student.
 He's studying law, and doesn't have enough to eat, so his cognition is
 somewhat affected, as it goes through stages of starvation and drunkenness.
 So he doesn't think so clearly.
 He wants to study law to help society, and he finds out
 his sister is willing to enter into a loveless marriage, and to prostitute herself,
 so she has enough money to share with her mother,
 and to continue to pay for his law studies. And that doesn't seem like a good deal to him.

 At the same time, he owes money to a pawnbroker who hates everyone,
 a miserable person in every way imaginable. That is how Dostoevsky describes the situation.
 The pawnshop has a niece, if I remember correctly, who treats them like a slave and mistreats them.
 She gets money in all kinds of ways, but never does anything with it,
 she lives in poverty. And he sees her as someone without whose existence
 the world would be better off.
 All those things take place in his imagination, and he decides that,
 because there is no ultimate measure of value, all morality is essentially cowardice.
 Somewhat the opposite of what Nietzsche concluded.
 He said most people are cowardly, and justify that with their morals. But Raskolnikov
 had the idea, "Why do I have to obey any rule?
 If there is no ultimate ground for all these rules, it is just convention and cowardice.
 And if I'm strong enough, then I can step out of that box and do whatever I want. "

 So he decides to kill the pawnshop, which he does, with success. And not only that,
 he gets away with it too. And that's about a third of "Guilt and Penance,"
 and the rest of the book is about the way it falls apart,
 because he has performed that act. It is truly brilliant
 investigating the way a value system holds you together, even in ways you don't know,
 and if you get out of there, and violate your relationship with it, in a profound way,
 then it will have catastrophic psychological consequences,
 that affect your entire being.
 We know this is not just any theory. Because many people, especially soldiers who develop post-traumatic stress disorder,
 develop post-traumatic stress disorder if they
 seeing themselves do what they consider very cruel, brutal, or immoral.
 They are in a situation where that course of action is very likely.

 A war situation.
 Usually it's very intense, and they don't have much time to decide.
 And who knows what the specific circumstances of the event in question are, but very many people
 are so devastated to see themselves doing things they would not have believed
 a person would be able to do that, that they no longer recover.
 That's partly because they violate the ethical structure that holds them together,
 which includes their ideas, their plans, their perception, and their interaction
 with other people.
 That's a unified field, in a sense. And if you damage that and it fragments
 then you fragment yourself, and that's not just a psychological observation,
 it is a psychophysiological observation.
 You can be under so much stress, produce such high stress levels, that your brain
 start to get damaged by the stress hormones. So it's not just a psychological state,
 it is damage to the core of your being, in a sense.
 The collapse of belief systems and their destabilization was well thought out
 by these thinkers at the end of the nineteenth century. Then there are the technological changes,
 and the sociological and political changes at the beginning of
 the twentieth century, leaving everyone in a state of confusion.
 Like in Germany in the 1920s.
 The Germans had gone through a terrible period of war in the trenches,
 so all the men were damaged.
 Some had spent months at the front, in the trenches.
 Their political system had disappeared, and in its place came a little-rooted democracy.
 And then their economy collapsed, and Germany went through a period of hyperinflation,
 effectively dropping the value of their money to zero.
 That meant if you were sixty-five and had saved your whole life to have enough money
 to be able to retire, and you were a good citizen, sensible and considered, then it was already
 your property suddenly disappeared. And at the same time the communist revolution took place
 in Soviet Russia. And they were very concerned in Germany that
 the same might happen there. And the communists were always trying to
 for they had the "Comintern," the Communist International,
 dedicated to destabilizing and producing non-communist governments
 the conditions for the revolution. So it wasn't paranoia, it was a real threat.
 It was in this disorder that fascism and the Nazis arose.
 This is not surprising, because chaos awakens the desire for order.

 That was a possibility for people, instead of following an abstract messiah,
 like the idea in classical Christianity,
 they created a new messiah, namely Hitler. And that certainly didn't seem to be an improvement.
 Because Hitler was a messiah of destruction and fire,
 about 120 million people died in World War II, and Germany
 was left ruined. Hitler killed himself in his bunker under burning Berlin,
 while the Russians entered Germany, and they were not happy.

 You didn't want to be a German while the Soviets moved towards you,
 after you invaded their country, pushed them back to the middle of the Soviet Union,
 and caused enormous damage and suffering.
 It was a terrible situation. And the messiah figures that the Russians turned to,
 Lenin and Stalin were unprecedentedly barbaric and cruel. And it's strange ...
 we hardly get any education about what happened in the Soviet Union
 in the twentieth century.
 We know a lot more about what happened in Germany, the Holocaust,
 and it is very important for people to know that, but there were tens of millions of people
 destroyed in the Soviet Union. And because they were killed by
 people who, in principle, were motivated by leftist utopian ideals ...
 our education seems to see that as more forgivable.
 And that is certainly not the case.
 So the attempt to generate secular alternatives to religious belief did not seem to work.
 And the alternative of nihilism has its problems.
 One of these is the type of problems that Dostoevsky talked about. And the children who
 shoot up high schools and explode with rage,
 these are often people who feel that their life has no meaning, that life
 despicable that the suffering is too great and that they bear the burden of an unfair reality.
 And they develop extremely dark and destructive ideas about revenge
 and terror, sometimes for years, and then they go out into the world
 to do those things. And it is not that their thinking is irrational.
 It's coherent.
 It is only based on principles you may disagree with,
 like the principle, "Anyone I don't like deserves death." But in the absence
 of a formal way of demonstrating that such thoughts are not only immoral, but wrong
 in an absolute sense, it is very difficult to invent ways to defend ourselves
 against those two extremes.
 The extremes of destructive nihilism, and the extremes of ideological obsession.
 Nietzsche started to work out solutions for this, and I ended up with that
 in the previous lecture.
 Dostoevsky's solution was to return to Christianity, to revitalize it.
 And that was the same strategy that Alexander Solzhenitsyn tried to work out,
 and also Tolstoy, in Russia, which I will tell you more about in the next lecture.

 Nietzsche's idea was that people should ... he said
 in his statement about the death of God, that men should become like gods,
 to be able to bear the consequences of the disintegration of the previous civilization.
 He believed ... his thoughts on this point are somewhat patchy.
 Nietzsche was a great critic of institutionalized Christianity, and he was very good at diagnosing.

 He could point out what was rotten in the core of western civilization, modern civilization,
 but when it came to describing what to do about it ... he didn't live long.

 He died quite young.
 By the way, there is a video of Nietzsche in an institution, online.
 I found it recently, in the evening.
 I didn't know it was ever filmed, but there's a video out
 around 1899, in which he is in an institution, where he ended up in his early forties.
 He talked about the development of the "Übermensch," a bit often
 translated as "superhuman." And his idea was that people should take the burden
 of creating new systems of meaning and morality, tailor-made.
 They should create new values.
 Well, Jung took Nietzsche's diagnosis very seriously, and you can certainly say
 that Jung was as influenced by Nietzsche as by Freud. And I would say he is in a number of ways
 was more influenced by Nietzsche, because what Jung tried to do was try
 discover what happened to the lost values.
 The Nietzschean idea is that it is possible for people to create their own values.
 That's problematic, in several ways,
 because it doesn't seem to be exactly ... and many existentialists
 who followed Nietzsche, Jean-Paul Sartre for example, believed in radical freedom
 from people. That we are doomed to freedom, and that it is necessary
 that we create our own meanings and values, because we are confronted with the void,
 and life is ugly, brutal and short, to use Hobbes's terms,
 and we must be able to face it, and live despite it.
 That solution has several problems.
 The first is: if you create your value system,
 if i mine, then there is no reason to assume that they are sufficient
 agree, so as not to have to fight each other to the death.
 That's a big deal.
 Each person has their own belief system.
 Fine, but how ... that's a kind of structured philosophical anarchy.
 That might be fine if you happen to live alone on an island,
 but when you're stuck with all those other people, it's hard to sustain.
 And so Sartre famously said, "Hell, that's the others."
 Because he saw the other, that which he was not,
 as an oppressive force that prevented him from manifesting his destiny,
 in his own way.
 Others can be hell, but that doesn't mean ...
 First of all, that's very one-sided, because ... of course other people are hell,
 you are hell too, and nature is hell.
 You can find hell in many places, but nonetheless
 the most meaningful aspects of our lives are often our social relationships,
 and you cannot blame everything on the pathological society. And we must not forget
 that Sartre ...
 no reasonable criticism of the communists was formulated until the late 1960s.
 That was quite late.
 People with some sense, George Orwell for example, already figured out the whole Soviet experiment
 had become very murderous in the early 1940s. So Sartre proposed radical freedom
 as the existential answer to the revelation of the absence of meaning,
 but when it came down to it, he couldn't resist the temptation to identify with a totalitarian structure.
 So I don't see why we should pay any attention to what he said.
 There is another problem with the idea that people should create their own values,
 and that is that it is not that simple. The problem seems to be
 that you don't obey yourself very well.
 You can say, "This is my code,
 that I will follow. "
 Let's do that, to get started.
 You say, "I'm going to study a lot, and perform well in my subjects," for example.
 But you don't.
 You procrastinate, you gotta read a lot, and you know you gotta read it
 and you should read it for reasons that are important to you in theory,
 but you can't manage to sit down and read.
 Your attention wanders, you do three or four stupid things, and you feel awful
 it feels like you are betraying yourself, and it may be an ongoing pattern in your life.
 But you discover that you are unable to create your own values.
 Somehow you can't control yourself, and get there
 from the psychoanalytic ideas. Freud noted,
 in the aftermath of Nietzsche, that you are not in charge of your own psyche.
 There are many "yous" in you, and they don't all want the same thing.
 So the idea that you can generate meaning yourself is very ... is an insufficient
 developed idea, for there are many meaning-generating structures within you. And not alone
 don't all point in the same direction, which is a big deal, but
 they don't necessarily realize themselves in an integrated way,
 over time, and they don't necessarily work together in a way that allows you to
 you find your place among other people, and in society.
 "Make your own meaning."
 Which part of you?
 You are not a unity.
 That is a big problem, and the other problems remain completely unsolved.
 One possible answer, and this is one of the more radical existentialists,
 is that society needs to be reorganized, but we already know where that will lead.

 When people are radically reorganizing society, as far as we have seen,
 this usually leads to a very murderous catastrophe.
 It seems reasonable to assume that those experiments
 all have been tried.
 Well, Jung, like Dostoevsky, was very interested in returning to the sources of meaning,
 out of which, according to him, our original religious ideas had emerged, and that is
 his idea of ​​the collective unconscious.
 Some of the radical criticism of religious systems is based on
 the idea that there is such a thing as conscious beliefs, that there are articulated beliefs
 which you can sum up in a creed, but that is not correct.
 It seems far from correct, and Nietzsche, in fact, knew that.
 He knew that many of our social institutions had emerged from the bottom up,
 and had become articulated only after they had taken on embodied form.
 A tribe learns to organize itself over thousands of years
 of trying, and wrestling with each other, et cetera. They enter the tribe
 with an underlying biological structure, and their sociological and political interactions
 are limited by all those things. And maybe they produce a description of that,
 over time, a description of itself, and an articulate representation, and that
 is the religious system.
 It is not that the religious system is conceived first, as a system of metaphysical assumptions,
 images, and dreams, which are then transformed into rules, which are imposed on the population, who then obey them.
 And in general, when people criticized formal religion, they criticized it
 as if it had developed like this. That's a Marxist idea, for example,
 that religion is opium for the people, and that the religious structures
 designed so that a small elite could control the population.
 In almost every domain there is a small elite that dominates the population.
 It doesn't matter which domain you take.
 So Marx is correct in that there is always an unequal distribution of power
 between an elite minority and a non-elite majority. But say that, that's the cause of
 all systems in which people interact with each other is incredibly ill-considered.
 Thus phenomena that are extraordinarily complex are reduced to
 an aspect.
 That does not help. An example.
 When you sample songs on YouTube, you create a chart of how popular songs are.

 You will then find out that about ten songs ... half of all songs
 played at any time will be one of ten songs.
 What you also discover is that half of all the songs that are played,
 be played by one, or more, of ten musicians. And that's true even if you like it
 the 1930s is going to now. When you watch popular music, you keep seeing the same thing.
 Almost everything that almost everyone listens to is made by very few people.
 There are millions of musicians, but you've never heard of most of them, and most of them
 you will never hear a song.
 It's a small minority, and you can see this happening in every area of ​​creative production.

 A small elite is created and dominates the entire domain.
 It would be ridiculous to assume the ten most popular singers
 and musicians working right now were the ones who set up the system
 to let itself blossom.
 Obviously that's a silly idea, and it doesn't get a smarter idea if you
 looks at another domain, where there is great diversity and an elite is emerging.
 That is a very common phenomenon.
 It happens wherever there is creative production,
 and that's why 1 percent of people have about 50 percent of the money.
 This is no different in other creative domains.
 We'll talk about why that happens later, but think it is
 because those people have set up the system in such a way to benefit themselves ... that element is also there,
 of course. Because once you are rich, you will prefer political policy
 that keeps you rich. But that doesn't mean you've set up the whole system
 that made you rich, in the beginning. In addition, they are not the same people, over time.

 1 percent of the people has the majority of the money ... it's always 1 percent,
 but they are not the same people.
 Individuals usually only have money for a very short time, and big companies
 do not stay upright for long.
 They last an average of thirty, thirty-five, forty years, and that was it. Then they disappear.
 Because the economic landscape is constantly changing.
 It's very difficult for a company to ... there aren't that many steam truck companies anymore,
 and no one makes blimps, and no one makes typewriters.
 Things are moving fast, and that at some point you dominated the domain,
 does not mean that you will be able to do this the next moment.
 Well, creating meaning yourself is complicated. And then there is another problem
 namely: why do you think you have enough time?
 Often people come to me with relationship problems,
 and part of the problem is that they shaped their relationship beyond social norms. They do,
 and then they say to me, "We're not getting married,
 because getting married is just a piece of paper. "Which is really silly,
 unbelievably silly. But behind that lies the idea that they
 wanting to be free from social constraints so that they can shape their relationship in their own way, if you take them
 want to appreciate the desire for freedom, instead of escaping responsibility.
 But the problem with that is ... okay, good luck.
 Try it.
 I don't know why you assume you have enough time in your thirties or forties
 that you engage in relationships to discover how it should function.
 You don't stand a chance. And what makes it worse is that very few people
 know how to negotiate. Because it works like this.
 You either conform to the social order or you stand outside it.
 If you are out of it, you are in a chaotic place, because there are no guidelines.
 And then you live chaotically because there are no guidelines, or you start formulating order.
 But to do that, you need to know what you want and how to express it.
 And then you have to find out what your partner wants and help him express it.
 And then you have to negotiate a solution.
 I would say one in twenty people knows how to negotiate.
 It is very difficult.
 Consider the steps.
 First, you have to know what you want, and then you have to admit it to yourself.
 You probably won't even be able to do that first.
 What do you want?
 Much of what you want cannot be articulated.
 I will give you an example.
 Some interesting research has been done some time ago into predicting the permanence of relationships.
 This was the question:
 "How many negative interactions do you have to have, in relation to positive ..." Sorry.
 "How many positive interactions per negative interaction should you have
 with your partner, for a stable relationship? "
 Well, suppose you have one negative interaction per positive interaction.
 Or maybe you have ten negative per positive, and you can imagine a different situation
 where you have a hundred positives for each negative, the whole
 encompassing potential continuum. And you use that to predict relational satisfaction and permanence.
 And you may think, "One hundred is positive for every negative
 the desirable ratio. Those people have a relationship with
 incessant compliments and happiness.
 Those are the ones that stick together. "
 But that's not true.
 You can see that there is a domain with an optimal ratio.
 If it is less than five positives per negative, then your relationship is falling apart.
 That is too negative, because people feel negative emotions more than
 positive emotions, you may feel more pain than satisfaction.
 One in five is too punitive, and people will not stay. But if you are upstairs
 the eleven comes to one, it is not punitive enough. You think, "What does that mean?"

 What do you want in a relationship?
 You think, "Happiness."
 That's not what you want, it turns out.
 You want someone you can measure with.
 You don't want a doormat.
 You don't want everything to be easy, and this is true
 Kierkegaard talked about it when he talked about his decision
 make things harder for people because they need it.
 You know that too cause you're dating someone and he adores you
 and takes everything from you, and gives nothing but positive reactions,
 then you immediately lose your respect for him, and you start looking for someone
 which is more interesting. I think that will come
 because you want your partner to challenge you. So that you are not only reasonable
 get along, on a daily basis, that you can live together in the same space
 in a fairly calm way. But you also want there to be enough tension in the relationship
 so that you are both part of a process of mutual transformation.
 Try specifying that in an articulated way.
 Good luck.
 That also explains people's strange tendencies, such as the fact that they stay
 in rather negative relationships. "What the hell are you doing there?"
 If you had put it two years ago, you would have said, "I want someone by which
 I feel miserable half the time. "Of course you'll never say that,
 but it may well be that you are looking for that.
 Well, Heidegger was another philosopher who faced the problems
 attempted to resolve, which Nietzsche and Dostoevsky had set out. And the way
 Heidegger tried to solve them was by looking at philosophy in a radically new way.
 He was one of the most important phenomenologists, and I told you a while ago that the phenomenologists
 decided to reconstruct Western philosophy so that it would focus on being, rather than knowledge.
 The hardest thing to understand with the phenomenologists is some
 they meant exactly by "be."
 I'll give you a sketch.
 That's where the term "Dasein" comes from, which is a German word, and it means
 "there are."
 Right now you are in Dasein, and Dasein is the totality of your experience.
 And that's an experience of the vast world, the natural world,
 and then the social world, and within it the world of your subjective experience,
 and that constitutes being. And the phenomenologists argue that ...
 they don't participate in the "subject / object game," they are beyond the distinction between
 subject and object, which is part of the scientific worldview.
 So it's a real paradigm shift because you follow the rules of the old perspective
 cannot use within the new perspective.
 You have to start with new assumptions.
 One of the things you will do when you start looking phenomenologically,
 is to assume that everything you experience is real.
 In a phenomenological world there is no attempt to reduce pain
 to something material.
 Pain is a phenomenon in itself.
 That also applies to tension.
 And also for joy.
 All things that scientists of consciousness call "qualia," which they see as qualities of
 the objective world, are not so viewed by the phenomenologists.
 They call that primary elements of being.
 It's a very interesting way of seeing things because it makes it possible
 reacquire the validity of your own experience.
 You can no longer say, "That's just subjective."
 That does not mean that everything you claim subjectively is true, objective or
 for others people.
 It does mean that everything you experience subjectively is real.
 That doesn't mean you shouldn't think about it, or analyze it, or categorize it,
 you still have to do that, but you are in one place
 where you don't have to deny or subordinate the reality of your own experience to anything.

 For example, when I do dream analysis with someone, which I often do when people dream,
 for dreams, as Jung noted, are manifestations of being.
 You don't make them up.
 They appear to you.
 They appear out of nowhere.
 They manifest.
 They do that in a strange way, I think because they contain unarticulated thoughts.
 But if you can get a grip on them and judge them, they can sometimes tell you things
 that you could not have discovered in any other way. And what's cool
 is that they have the same impersonal as phenomena in the greater world of experience.

 You never think about the truth of a chair.
 He's just there, and dreams are like that.
 They're just there, and if you can decipher what they indicate,
 you can get a perspective on your own experience that is not influenced by your local subjective
 wishes and desires.
 I hate to use the word "subjective" in this context.
 So phenomenology is the search for being.
 In being, there are several aspects, and one aspect ...
 I can never remember those names, but I have it here.
 Oh yeah.
 Heidegger divided the world of experience into three categories.
 There is the "Umwelt," which I believe is the world, which extends beyond culture and the individual.
 There's the "Mitwelt," and that's the world we share with everyone,
 the social world and social structures. And then there is the "Eigenwelt,"
 the domain of experience that is only yours, that other people cannot participate in.
 Those are the elements of being, as far as the phenomenologists are concerned.
 And in those domains of being, different experiences manifest themselves.
 We have discussed a number of them that are manifestations of the Eigenwelt.
 Scientists would call those things emotional or motivated states.
 Usually people think of them as feelings.
 I would say, "I feel like this.
 I feel this or that. ”And those are experiences that manifest, or that you have,
 depending on how you see it, which indicate how you should act
 in relation to being.
 This is relevant for psychotherapy in particular,
 because the phenomenologists were very interested in the manifestation of meaning.
 You could say that nihilism is the absence of meaning and totalitarianism is the locking of meaning.
 If you are totalitarian, you say, "All meanings are there
 in relation to this structure. "
 It's like ... the phenomenologists would say you try the Umwelt,
 the natural world, the Mitwelt, the social world, and the Eigenwelt,
 your personal world, you try to reduce all of that to the Mitwelt. So that everything
 fits within a statement given to you by a higher authority.
 And the nihilists, of course, don't want any of that.
 They use their Eigenwelt, their personal world, for meaning
 declare any domain invalid.
 The phenomenologists would say it is a mistake to use your rationality
 to undermine the manifestation of meaning. I can give you an example of that.
 Imagine that you are a good nihilist, and you are considering doing something difficult,
 like studying. And then you think when you're a little bit down
 maybe you run into an obstacle and you think, "I'm going to quit.

 What does it matter?
 What does it matter if I get my diploma?
 This knowledge is not very relevant or meaningful, and who will notice the difference
 in a million years? "
 You think, "That's a perfectly rational criticism, because who will
 still know in a million years? "Even if you can argue that someone might know,
 there might be effects of yours remaining in a million years, we multiply that by
 a hundred thousand, so we have a trillion years.
 There you are, a tiny speck of dust on a slightly larger speck, in a galaxy
 with who knows how many billions of stars. And there are billions
 galaxies, and more, sprawled across this one
 tremendous expanding time. And in the midst of all that, who cares what you do?
 A phenomenologist would say, "Let's see how meaning manifests
 if you change your personal world in different ways. "
 Imagine you are trying to do something, maybe you work
 as a volunteer in a hospital with sick children.
 You read them aloud so that they are distracted from their pain. And you say, "In a billion years,
 then who will notice the difference? It's pointless to do this. "
 The phenomenologists would say, "If the framework you use,
 if you change the way being manifests
 making it meaningless and absurd, then you have to try to experience it in a different way. "

 Because a rationalist ... the phenomenologists would say
 that a rationalist cannot defend himself against the argument, "What does it matter in a trillion years?
 There you are, a tiny speck of dust, among other specks.
 Ultimately it is meaningless. ”A phenomenologist would say,“ Expand the meaning.
 That's the mark of the truth. "
 That's a completely different way of thinking.
 For example, he would say that if you go to a hospital to read to sick children,
 then the framework you use should be the way you
 the experience allows itself to be manifested, such that the experience manifests itself
 as meaningful as possible, rather than as meaningless as possible.
 That you are able to twist your own experience, causing certain elements
 of your existence becoming meaningless does not mean that that is correct.
 The fact that it becomes meaningless indicates that it is incorrect.
 It depends entirely on what you assume to be primary, that's the point of the phenomenologists.

 If you take your strict rationality as primary, then if it can attack anything
 and destroy, then that object deserves to be attacked and destroyed.
 But if you turn it around and say, "What you have to do is deal with
 allow your experience, or your experience to manifest, in a way that allows you
 most meaningfully in the here and now. The framework you use to do that, and it works,
 that's right."
 That's a completely different way of viewing it. And it is one
 real way out of the pathology of rationalism. Because it is not obvious why
 what you think should be primary.
 The phenomenologists would go even further.
 They would say ... you can see it this way ...
 Binswanger said, "What we perceive primarily and above all ..." Binswanger was
 a psychiatrist who was very influenced by ... Binswanger and Boss, the people about it
 we will most often speak were greatly influenced by Heideggerian ideas.
 They say: "What we perceive primarily and above all, are not impressions of taste, sound, smell,
 or touch, not even things or objects, but meanings. "
 The idea of ​​the phenomenologists is that being consists of meaning.
 It is not an objective world made up of things, but being made up of meaning.

 Some meanings can be positive, and some negative,
 and some neutral, but the fundamental elements of being,
 the fundamental element of being is meaning. Then there is a discussion between Binswanger and Boss,
 about how that meaning manifests itself.
 Binswanger would say, "You give meaning to the world."
 That is a kind of Nietzschean idea that you create your own values.
 You have an inner, a priori, ontological structure,
 which designs the world, a matrix of meaning, which determines how the world appears to you.

 The easiest way to see that is ... you end up in a certain time and situation ...
 that's another existentialist idea. That's part of the absurdity of your life.
 You are here and now, in this specific context and situation.
 You have to deal with that, and that applies to everyone.
 There are arbitrary circumstances in everyone's existence, and one of those arbitrary circumstances
 is the structure with which you view the world. And that structure leaves
 lighting up certain things, and omitting other things. So the way meaning manifests
 is a reflection of this a priori ontological structure, an a priori mode of being.
 There is no being possible, that is your experience,
 without the structure that consists of ... of which you consist, and which is given.
 It is the activity of that structure that determines the meaning of things.
 Boss would say the opposite.
 He would say, "Don't look like that.
 You have to look at your existence in its entirety, which consists of the natural world,
 the cultural world, and your own world, and you have to notice that meaning appears in different places,
 by itself. "
 You cannot reduce that to the effectiveness of an ontological a priori structure.
 For example, what about the meaning of things you don't understand?

 It is difficult to understand how to attribute the meaning of things that you do not understand
 what you do understand.
 The meaning just seems to be there.
 An example.
 You are in a relationship with someone and you discover that he is having an affair.
 Discovering that relationship will mean a lot to you.
 But you don't know what the meaning is.
 You will likely interpret it very negatively to begin with, unless part of it
 want to get away from yourself from the relationship. Because sometimes
 are you happy when you are cheated on because it has had its day.
 Anyway you may run into things you don't understand
 that are meaningful as such.
 I think you cannot separate your structure from the structure of everything.
 There is always an interaction, and meaning arises from that dynamic.
 Well, another way to see it.
 You read a book.
 The book has meaning.
 Where is the meaning?
 In your head?
 In the book?
 That is difficult to make up, because there is obviously a subjective element.

 There is one aspect that is unique to you, but that meaning would not manifest
 without the book. And the book wouldn't be meaningful if you and the book
 were not embedded in this complex structure. So the meaning is an emergent property,
 an emergent property of the dynamics of all elements of being.

 That's an interesting way of seeing it. There are all these elements of being,
 and their dance produces meaning.
 A phenomenologist would say that some meanings are life-affirming,
 and some life-destroying. And the phenomenologist would say,
 from a clinical perspective, that if you live in a system
 in which life-destroying meanings manifest themselves, you have to turn your attention away from them,
 and you have to turn to meanings that are life-affirming. Which is quite interesting
 the phenomenological perspective is that you can experiment with it quite easily.

 A few phenomenological experiments, for example:
 For the next two weeks, you should detach yourself from yourself so that you are observant
 be an observer of your existence.
 You're not so much trying to control it, you're trying to let it run its course.
 And what you pay attention to is when the meaning that manifests,
 as things go on is clearly life-affirming meaning.
 You will see ... it depends on how well you are situated,
 because if you are surrounded by ... if your field of experience mainly
 negative, they will be relatively rare events, but they will be there nonetheless.
 That can be just seconds or minutes a day, or every other day,
 but you suddenly find yourself in a situation where things are
 as you would like it.
 You are in a situation where being is manifest as acceptable.
 That is a situation in which nihilism is not adequate.
 It does not apply because the quality of the experience is such that it is life-affirming.
 You should notice that.
 It happens, and then you can ask the question, "What are the conditions,
 which allowed all different
 sub-elements of being worked together harmoniously, at that moment, in that situation,
 what made that meaning appear? "
 The next question would be, "How can I make sure that
 occurs more often? "
 So you can steer yourself towards life-affirming meanings and away from
 meanings related to despair and nihilism. You do ...
 as if you were navigating a boat.
 You actually do, I think.
 I think you are navigating to find the boundary between order and chaos because there
 is meaning.
 Right there is meaning, and you can feel it, it is a kind of place.
 That is the other thing the phenomenologists are trying to make clear.
 These things are real.
 They are not secondary manifestations of an underlying reality.
 They are reality.
 I also think we'll talk about this when we get to the neuropsychological part
 come from the college that our brains are in fact primarily set up to detect meaning.

 You detect meaning before you detect an object, because you have to detect meaning
 to know what to do if something happens very quickly. There are moments
 to which you need to be able to respond, without having enough time to see,
 what is there.
 You just don't have time for it. The question is:
 what exactly do you mean by meaning?
 I think meaning is relevance to behavior, or relevance to the structure that defines behavior,
 but those are very basic observations.
 It is not that you see the object and then format the meaning.
 It's the other way around, in many cases.
 You perceive the meaning and abstract the object. And there is enough neurophysiological evidence for that.

 For example, your retina is a pattern detector, and the information
 from your retina is passed to your brain through the facial nerve, but the facial nerve branches
 and goes to all kinds of places in your body.
 Some of it is mapped onto your spinal cord so your eyes can move your body.
 Some of it is mapped onto your amygdala so that you perceive the meaning of facial expressions,
 without even seeing the face.
 There are people with "blind vision," with a damaged visual cortex, who see you
 can show angry faces that they cannot see, but they respond electrophysiologically to them
 as if they were confronted with something negative. Because the pattern on the retina
 manifests itself directly on a system that maps some form of meaning.
 So you can perceive meaning without perceiving an object. The idea that you
 derives the meaning from the object ... that you see the thing, and give meaning to it,
 is correct on some levels of analysis, but incorrect on many other levels of analysis.
 Something else to try that is phenomenologically inspired ...
 This is a pretty interesting trick.
 This can be difficult for you, so be careful when trying this.
 What you can try is to observe what you say for two weeks.
 You have to detach yourself again, from yourself.
 You must suspend the belief that your thoughts and you are the same.
 Then you observe what you say, and watch ...
 and Rogers would also advocate this ... you have to watch what you say, your feeling ...
 you have to see if what you say improves or deteriorates the quality of your life.
 And if you stop believing what you're saying and look at the consequences instead,
 how it manifests as a change of your existence, then you can too
 learn to say only things that improve the quality of being.
 That's a good thing if you can, but it's also terrifying
 for you will find that almost nothing you say does.
 Most of it is neutral, but quite a bit has the exact opposite effect.
 It makes things worse.
 I think I've noticed the word "phenomenon," which is true of the term
 "phenomenology" comes from,
 the word "phenomenon" comes from the Greek word "phainesthai." And phainesthai means
 "(to show up."
 The phenomenologists state that being consists of meanings that appear to you,
 and that those different meanings attract you.
 They are like signposts for you to follow.
 I noticed this when reading, for example.
 I am reading a complex text, and a particular passage hits me.
 It manifests as meaningful.
 Why?
 One of the phenomenologists, Binswanger, would say that
 that's because of the way I'm structured. But Boss would say, "No, it's a dance,
 that takes place within the structure of everything, and the result thereof is the manifestation of
 this meaning. "
 It has been my experience that I can follow red lines of meaning in different books,
 it's something that guides me, that sense of meaning. I often find something
 in a book that is meaningful, and then I read the other things that that person wrote.
 And then I see if the people he's read have meaningful things to say,
 and then I can expand that network. You follow a road that is there for you
 who is prepared for you in the world. The phenomenological idea is
 that if you follow that road ... what happens then, they are more and more
 will be integrated around you. And those experiences of intrinsic significance begin to multiply,
 and become more and more intense, and if you are able to, for a longer period of time,
 then an increasing part of you will be, revealing kind of meanings
 that keep you from becoming nihilistic or totalitarian.
 That is the fundamental theory of phenomenological psychotherapy.

 You can say, "You are depressed and tense, and you are not doing well
 with your life.
 What are you holding up? "
 You have to observe that. And then we can say, "Are there ways we
 enlarge that small area that keeps you upright? So that more and more
 of your experience, and push back the neutral or negative elements. "
 This is largely due to attention and the willingness to
 1) treat things as if their meaning is real, and 2) allow that to be reality
 transforms the way you will experience things in the future.
 Till Thursday.