So today I’m gonna tell you the best threestories that I know, I think, and, I think
these stories are absolutely, phenomenallypotent, and the reason for that is that I
think they illustrate in an extraordinarily-powerfulway the nature of the processes that led to
the establishment of western democratic ideals.
Mircae Eliade, whose work I rely on substantially,to make the following argument, has taken
western academic culture to task in a mannerthat hasn’t fully been revealed yet.
He said that, like all human cultures, thewest is parochial and narrow in its viewpoint,
and although over the last three hundred yearsthere’s been a substantial amount of cross-cultural
intermingling and a potential broadening ofphilosophical and religious horizon, that
broadening has not been sufficiently complete;
If we build on the viewpoint that I’ve beendeveloping with you over the last few courses
and make the presupposition that religiousmodes of thinking are more phenomenological
than they are rational, which means that theydeal more with what you experience, say, than
with the objective world, if we look at archaicreligious stories through that lens, then
they can start to open up, and so, given that,I want to open up three religious stories
to you today, two in depth, and one only inpassing because we’ll return to it later.
I’ll start with, Judeo-Christian Myth ofGenesis, and when I say myth, of course, you
all know this already, but when I say myth,I don’t mean untruth, I mean a form of knowledge
that’s narrative in structure and predicatedon presumptions that aren’t empirical; a
myth describes processes of transformation,a myth describes them, a myth describes the
process whereby elements of experience comeinto being and transform
On Genesis, the fundamental structural elementsof Genesis are the Word of God and chaos,
and the Hebrew words for chaos and waste aretehom, for chaos, and tohu, for waste, and
tehom in particular, although toho as well,are very interesting words because you can
track their derivation historically, and sometimesif you contract the derivation of words historically,
you can get some sense of the culture milieuout of which the word sprang,
and we know what tyomat means because we havewritten records of a story that involves a
character named Tiamat, and Tiamat is a dragonwho lives at the bottom of the ocean; in the
oldest creation myth we have, which is theEnuma Elish, the Sumerian creation myth, the
Sumeria, Babylon, Acadia, rightly regardedas the birthplace of modern western civilization.
In Genesis, two processes unite to producebeing, the first of those processes or states
is chaos, represented by taom or tohu.
The second of those processes is logos, andlogos is another word that has an extraordinarily
broad range of meaning; it’s generally transcribedin the Christian tradition as the word, and
it’s identified with Christ, which is avery peculiar identification because it’s
the Word of God that creates order out ofchaos and, of course, the Word of God in Genesis
is a phenomena that predates the birth ofChrist infinitely from a classical religious
perspective, so the fact that the two beingsare identified as of great peculiarity and
also of great interest.
The fundamental story of Genesis is somethinglike this, and it’s perhaps the most brilliant
contribution of Judeo-Christian thought toworld history, its total impact is virtually
incalculable.
The idea is this: that chaos can be conceptualizedas something that has an essentially feminine
aspect as a matrix, and a matrix is a structurefrom which other structures emerge, and the
story in Genesis makes the hypothesis thatlogos, which is the Word of God, a phenomena
associated with speech and communication andlogic, logos: logic, rationality, courage,
exploration, all combined into a single entityor trait: logos, the combination of logos
and chaos is what brings order into being;that’s what the story in Genesis means;
it’s not an empirical description of theorigin of objects, it’s a phenomenological
description of the origin of experience,the idea being that without the piercing glance
of whatever consciousness is, whatever thebackground of experience is, the matrix, chaos,
cannot be conceptualized as real; it takesthe interplay between the feminine principle,
chaos, and the masculine principle, logos,in order to produce being.
Now that’s of substantial importance whenyou give some consideration to the fact that
immediately in Genesis, after the establishmentof livable order, the deity yahva identifies
the individual human being with logos, right,made in God’s image, that’s the essential
characteristic of the human being, and whatthat means is that the logos that operates
in human beings, which is this capacity tomake order out of chaos, is identical to the
principle that gives rise to the cosmos froma mythological perspective, so it partakes
of the deity in a very direct sense insofaras being itself is dependent on its operation.
Now it’s still possible to claim, giventhat perspective, that a story with that sort
of structure is superstitious and that itdoesn’t bear any relationship to what reality,
what actually constitutes reality, but youhave to understand that that story, old as
it is, is predicated on older stories, andit’s on the ground that those older stories
establish that our entire concept of naturalrights rests, so if you believe that natural
rights have an existence more than merelyarbitrary, the reason you believe that is
because they’re predicated, those rightsare predicated on the ideas that are expressed
in these myths,
Okay, so now we’re gonna go back in timeto Sumeria, and I’m gonna show you how the
Sumerian creation myth lays itself out, andnot only that, I’m going to describe to
you the direct political implications of theEnuma Elish, the Sumerian creation myth, because
the political implications of that myth arewell understood because the political structure
of Sumeria was directly associated with thestructure of the myth because the Sumeria
was regarded as the earthly represent of thehighest God in the Mesopotamian Pantheon,
whose name was Marduk, so insofar as you wereemperor, the reason that you were emperor,
and the, this is what gave your sovereigntylegitimacy, right, ‘cause sovereignty has
to have legitimacy otherwise there’s constantrevolutions.
What gave sovereignty legitimacy in Mesopotamiawas the identification of the emperor with
Marduk, and that had, that had certain implicationsfor the emperor, which we’ll discuss in
some detail
So the story starts like this.
You’ve got this Dragon, Tiamat, and Tiamatis a great primordial beast, who lives at
the bottom of the ocean.
And the ocean is water and water is associatedwith the primal element in archaic thinking
and I told you, there’s reasons for thatalready.
or if you viewed the transformation of desertsas a consequence of rain, you can understand
why water would be considered the elementthat gives life, right, that the element that,
that brings life forth, and we know from anevolutionary perspective that that’s accurate.
And we know that we’re 90 per cent waterand so to consider water the primal element
is no trivial conclusion.
No, no less than presuming that the sun isthe ultimate source of light, the ultimate
god, because the sun is the ultimate sourceof life as far as earth, as far as we’re
concerned on earth, right, because it’sthe source of all our energy.
These aren’t stupid concepts, all right.
So Tiamat is this horrible creature that lurksat the bottom of the primal element, all right.
Now she has a husband, Apsu.
Now the Mesopotamian creation myth doesn’tsay much about Apsu.
We only know that he’s the male consortof the Dragon of Chaos.
And we know from reading other sources ofmythology that the male consort of the Dragon
of Chaos generally represents either logosor culture.
So we’re gonna make the presupposition inthis particular case that the husband of Chaos
is Order or Culture, okay, and then the Mesopotamiansdon’t say much about that, that doesn’t,
the development of the idea of Apsu or Orderor Culture, doesn’t take new force until
the ancient Egyptians and we’ll talk aboutthem today too.
Okay so Tiamat and Apsu are locked into akind of sexual embrace according to the Mesopotamian
creation.
What does that mean?
It kinda means two things.
It means that they’re not really distinguishablebecause they’re locked into this embrace
and it also means that they’re up to somethingcreative because the act of sexual congress
in mythology is most usefully, is most frequentlyutilized as representation of something creative
or as representation of the probability ofsome new form coming to be, right.
All right.
So Apsu and Tiamat are locked into this embracein a state that other creation myths describe
as egg-like, the Pre-Cosmogonic egg, theirintermingling gives rise to the initial state
of being according to the Sumerians and theinitial state of being according to the Sumerians
is characterized by the dominion of the eldergods
These gods, being none too bright, make atremendous amount of racket, doing things.
Well what does that mean exactly?
Well it means something like this.
They make a lot of racket and they cause alot of trouble.
They make a lot of wind and all of their racketand trouble and wind and activity rouses Tiamat.
What does that mean?
Well it means if you do things, you get introuble.
It means even if you’re trying to solveproblems, you get into trouble because the
solution to a problem tend, tends to generatea whole bunch of new problems, right.
It’s like the Hydra.
So what it means is that it’s more or lessfated that any form of activity whatsoever
is likely to produce the threat of catastrophe
And of course we’re absolutely keenly awareof that in the modern world because we’re
possessed by this sense that all of our freneticactivity, all of our frenetic motivated activity
is producing alterations in the world ordersuch that Nature itself is going to 
be destroyed and eliminate us, right.
That’s classic Sumerian fear.
Nothing’s changed in the last 5,000 years.
The Sumerians presumed that once the eldergods where constructed and started moving
around on the planet, that their activitytheir mindless activity, because remember
these aren’t well integrated motivationalforces, they’re more like primordial beasts,
right.
Their unintegrated activity risks plungingeverything back in Chaos.
Well Tiamat’s the representative of Chaos,this generative Chaos, but so what if the
Sumerians say, “Well the elder gods causea lot of racket, they move around the planet
and they upset Tiamat,” and she decidesthat enough is enough and she’s gonna wipe
them out.
So she’s sitting at the bottom of the ocean,fuming away, as the elder gods go about their
business and then they take one step too manyand they kill Apsu, who’s her husband.
Now the Sumerian creation myth doesn’t saymuch about this, but we know that Apsu is
the male consort of Chaos.
That makes him Order.
So what happens is the elder gods destroyOrder itself.
They destroy Culture itself and as soon asyou destroy Culture, all hell breaks loose
and that’s exactly what happens in thisSumerian creation myth.
So Tiamat emerges, he’s gonna wipe everythingout and the world will revert back to its
primordial, non-existent state.
Now the, all the gods get wind of this andof course they’re just terrified because
they know that this thing that gave rise tothem, whatever it is, the matrix of being,
can easily wipe them out at a moment’s noticeand so despite the fact that they are transpersonal
and immortal and characterized by a certainamount of power, in the face of absolute Chaos,
they’re insufficient.
Now this occurrence is extending over a protractedperiod of time and as the elder gods are threatened,
they’re also breeding and mating and producingnew forms.
And they produce a great, great grandson,whose name is Marduk.
Now Marduk has a lot of very interesting attributes.
So the attributes are described in the EnumaElish in the following manner, so this is
what Marduk’s father sees when his wife,Damkina, gives birth to Marduk.
“So when he, who’s Marduk’s father,saw his son, he rejoiced, he beamed, his heart
was filled with joy.
He distinguished him and conferred upon himdouble equality with the gods.”
Okay, so that’s that first indication thatwhatever Marduk represents is something that’s
elevated beyond the normal status of a primordialdeity.
“So that he was highly exalted and surpassedthem in everything.
Artfully arranged beyond comprehension werehis members, not fit for human understanding,
hard to look upon, four were his eyes, fourwere his ears.
When his lips moved, fired blazed forth.
Each of his four ears grew large and likewise,his eyes, to see everything.
He was exalted among gods.
Surpassing was his form.
His members were gigantic.
He was surpassing in height.
Mariyutu, Mariyutu.”
One of his names.
“Sun of the sun god, the sun god of thegods.”
Okay.
Complex bit of poetry.
Says a bunch of things.
It says well whatever Marduk is, is the offspringof the gods.
Whatever Marduk is, is characterized by heightenedawareness.
Right?
Because he has four ears and they’re large.
Whatever Marduk is characterized by is thestatus that surpasses that of his fathers.
Whatever he’s characterized by, is associatedwith the power of speech, real power, because
when he speaks, fire spurts forth.
Marduk is also huge, but more importantly,he’s associated in this particular poem
with the sun.
Why is that?
Well the sun dominates consciousness, right,because we’re conscious during the day.
Most of our brain is visual cortex, so we’revisual creatures.
So when the sun rises is when the day begins.
So Marduk is also associated with whateverdeity dominates the day and that’s the deity
of consciousness.
And there’s more to the story of the Sun,right, because the Sun is also something that
rises and sets repeatedly and that means thatthe deity that dominates consciousness is
characterized by a cyclical nature.
That’s a Sun myth.
Sun rises in the morning renewed, as a consequenceof fighting a terrible battle in the night
with the enemies of everything that’s associatedwith consciousness.
A classic solar myth
So Apsu and Tiamat give rise to the worldof the gods.
The activity of the world of gods reawakensTiamat, she decides to destroy everything,
but at that moment the gods give birth toMarduk.
Now that’s a typical motif which is thatthe hero’s always born at the time of maximal
crisis and the reason for that is in part,it’s simple.
Look, if your culture is dealing well withthe forces of the unknown, so that everything
is static, but, static but productive, sothat problems themselves don’t arise, there’s
no reason for the hero, right, there’s noreason to confront the unknown.
It’s only when crisis beckons that the birthof the hero is necessary.
Marduk constitutes the birth of the hero.
and they say, “Look, you know, we’re inreal trouble unless someone goes out there
and confronts Tiamat straight on, she’sgonna wipe everything out, it’s a dangerous
and terrifying job, but somebody has to doit.
And Marduk says, “Oh that’s no problembut I got a few rules here and this is the
first rule, I’m in charge from here on forward.”
What does that mean exactly?
Well these archaic stories are polysemus and,or polysemic in Northrup Frye’s terminology
and what that means is that they can be readvalidly at multiple levels of analysis simultaneously.
And so one thing it means is that if you takethe 2-year-old child who’s essentially under
the Dominion of assorted primordial gods andgoddesses.
Right?
Aggression, fear, panic, and according toFreud, a certain degree of sexual aggression.
The child moves from motivated state to dominationfor motivated state It isn’t until the age
of 3 and 4 when, under the pressure appliedby the social world and as a consequence of
the maturation of the prefrontal cortex, whichmatures throughout childhood and adolescence
and doesn’t reach its final form until perhapsinto the early 20s, all of those fundamental
motivational forces start taking on a structuredrelationship to one another, which is to say
that once your, as your personality becomesintegrated, a single motive force forward
has to bring all of these underlying motivationalsystems into some sort of harmonious arrangement.
Okay so let’s, let’s see what the Sumeriansare doing here.
Okay, first of all they’re, they’re doingpsychology.
They’re trying to figure out, given thedominion of the, the elder gods, the indisputable
dominion of the elder gods, Instincts, whoshould rule?
Right?
What should be in charge?
How do you construct a hierarchy of values?
And then more complexly, when you integratea state, which is what the Mesopotamians did,
right, the first great civilization, whatdoes that mean?
The first time hundreds of tribes were hammeredinto some sort of stable, hierarchical order,
how do you represent that order?
“So Marduk gets his act together, the godsall meet in a huge chamber, they elect him
king and then they prepare him for battle.
When the gods, the fathers, beheld the powerof his word, they were glad and did homage,
saying ‘Marduk is king’.
They bestowed upon him a scepter, a throneand a royal robe.
They gave him an irresistable weapon, smitingthe enemy saying, ‘Go and cut off the life
of Tiamat.
May the winds carry her blood to out-of-the-wayplaces.’
After the gods, his fathers, had determinedthe destiny of Marduk, they set him on the
road, the way to success and attainment.”
So then he goes to the “heart of darkness”so to speak and confronts Tiamat, accuses
her of treachery and challenges her to battle.
“When Tiamat heard this, she became likeone in a frenzy and lost her reason.
She cried out loud and furiously.
To the very roots, her two legs shook backand forth.
She recited an incantation, repeatedly castingher spell.
As for the gods of battle, they sharpenedtheir weapons.
Tiamat and Marduk, the wisest of the gods,advanced against one another.
They pressed on into combat and approachedfor battle.”
Okay, well things don’t go out so well withTiamat from this point forward.
The first thing that Marduk does is encapsulateher in a net and I think that’s a really
interesting metaphor because that’s essentiallywhat human beings do when they encounter the
unknown, right.
They encapsulate it in an explanatory network,so it’s a way of binding up the, the anomaly,
or the unknown, and giving it a substantiveform.
“Then he cuts her into pieces and then hemakes the world out of her pieces.
In fact one of Marduk’s names is ‘He WhoMakes Ingenious Things’ as a consequence
of the combat with Tiamat.”
Now that’s very, very interesting becausewhat it means is that the Sumerians are presenting
in metaphorical form the notion that whenthe chips are down, the survival of being
depends on the capacity of whatever Mardukrepresents, the solar god, to encounter the
matrix of being, to cut it into pieces andto make the world and if you think about in
those terms, it’s a very, very straightforwardstory, right.
It’s basically the story of human beings,fundamentally the story of human beings, because
we, in the words of a famous evolutionarypsychologist, whose name completely escapes
me, we occupy the cognitive niche, right.
Our mode of being is creativity in the faceof the unknown and when Chaos threatens the
established mode of being, it’s necessaryfor us to put our creativity into action and
to carve out new territory as a consequenceof encounter with the unknown.
Why?
Well because we can take the world apart withour hands and put it together in new ways
and then we can code what we’ve done verballyand we can transmit it to another person and
then they can do the same thing.
And we’re all doing this all the time andwe’re all telling each other how we’re
doing it.
And that’s how the embodiment of logos inthe human being, which is precisely equivalent
to the Sumerian notion of Marduk, that’sprecisely how it is that we’re constantly
capable of redeeming the world.
and that’s why you make resolutions at NewYear’s because the new you is supposed to
be born at the new year.
OK, so what do theMesopotamians do at the new year?
They take their king and they bring him outsidethe city.
Now you have to understand that outside thecity is chaos, right, because these are city
states.
When you go outside the dominion of the human,you’re in chaos.
And then the priest makes the emperor kneeland takes all his marks of status off him
so he’s reduced to his essence fundamentally,bereft of his social persona, and then he
slaps him with a glove and humiliateshim andthe king is forced to recount his sins, right,
everything he did in thelast year that wasn’t up to Marduk standards,
so to speak.
And you can see, that’d be a pretty usefulthing to have somebody who’s in power do
on a regular basis, right, because it remindsthem that they’re in fact subject to a trans-personal
structure whose nature isn’t precisely evidentbut is nonetheless there, which is the case.
Act like Marduk or all hell will break looseand demolish your kingdom, which of course
is true now,as it was then now.
So the emperor gets humiliated, he has torecount his sins, then he’s locked up, then
heRe-enacts the battle with Tiamat and when
he emerges victorious, he’s locked up witha ritual prostitute, a hierodule, and they
mate.
Why?
Well, theHierodule, the ritual prostitute, represents
Tiamat.
Now why the hellwould that be, because Tiamat’s a dragon,
right, a horrible man-eating dragon that livesat the bottom of the ocean which is to say
that in any encounter with theunknown, as difficult traumatic and violent
as that might be, there’s also the possibilityfor something creative to emerge as a consequence,
right, because it’s out of theunknown that we mine new information
So insofar as the Mesopotamian emperor actedout the role of Marduk, then he was a good
emperor, then he deserved his sovereigntyand literally as well as figuratively, insofar
as he did play that role, then the societywas going to remain not only stable but constantly
updated because he’s engaged in this constantcreative contact with the unknown, aided and
abetted by his attempts to remember his owninadequacies and weaknesses and to do something
about them.
OK, so that’s a pretty interesting storyand it gets even more interesting when you
start to understand that the Judao-Christianmyth is assimilated to the Sumerian creation
myth by the union of the notions of chaosand Tiamat.
So the logos in Judao-Christian thinking,the word of God that produces order out of
chaos, is also essentially equivalent – atleast metaphorically speaking – to whatever
Marduk represents in the Sumerian creationmyth.
And we know that I mean our relationship withthe Enuma Elish is obscured by time but our
relationship with the stories that lay outthe fundamental sub-structure of western culture
is not so ameliorated even though we may notbelieve them explicitly anymore.
They still sit at the basis of our society.