Alright, so I was thinking today about howto explain this a little bit further.
So let’s say you’re going for a job interview.
And you’re nervous about it.
And you go into the job interview and thereare some people there, and some chairs and
tables, and a room that’s like this, maybenot quite this ugly, but something like this.
What’s in the room?
You’re nervous.
You’ve seen chairs and tables before, you’veseen people.
What’s in the room?
How about a set of alternate futures?
Right?
You know, that isn’t how we think.
It’s how we act.
And you know, if you talk about it, I wasnervous about going to this job interview.
Why?
Well I thought I might be evaluated.
Okay, well why does that matter?
Well, we know partly why it matters if welook at this figure again.
I’m pretty happy with this figure, all thingsconsidered.
You know, and you might say, well if I…maybe it’ll shape my faith and my belief
that I’m a good person.
That would be a little silly for an interview.
So if you’re thinking that way I would sayyou’re not thinking specifically enough.
Because there’s lots of reasons you mightnot do well at the job interview, including
the fact that they might have already giventhe job to someone else, for all you know.
So you don’t want to leap to the top ofthe hierarchy without cause.
So one of the things you might say is thatin the room there, there are threats that
might be posed to any level of the hierarchyof beliefs and behaviours that you use to
interact with the world.
Now the terror management people would tellyou…
let’s assume that this [points to figureon board] is a belief structure.
I don’t care whether you agree with theway it’s represented graphically or not,
for the time being, but let’s just assumethat what we’re talking about is a belief
structure.
Now the terror management people would tellyou that you have that belief structure, in
large part to protect you from the fear ofdeath, from death anxiety.
But there’s a bunch of problems with thatidea, not least that it actually side-steps
the issue of the function of the belief system.
It’s like, you don’t exactly have a beliefsystem to make philosophical sense out of
the world.
You have a system of tools, that are embodied,that allow you to actually act in the world.
Now you might also have an articulated representationof that on top that’s more or less accurate.
Probably less, all things considered.
And you know, maybe if your faith in thatis shaken, your faith in what you do will
also be shaken, because the two things areassociated.
But we should always remember that a beliefsystem doesn’t just protect you from the
fear of death, it protects you from death.
And that’s a lot different, you know.
I mean, this whole thing is your set of skills,and the perceptions and thoughts and emotions
that go along with those skills, and thenit’s an integrated structure consisting
of the particular manner in which you’veintegrated all your own little sub-parts and
then in relationship to the whole community.
You could also think about it, in some sense,as a holographic representation of the culture.
Now, I don’t know how much you guys knowabout holographs.
I don’t know very much about them either.
But there are some things I know about them…so if you shine a light on a holograph, you’ll
get a 3D image of whatever was there whenthe holograph was created; it’s created
by lasers.
And if you take a holograph and you breakit into pieces, and then you shine a light
on the pieces, you get the object in eachpiece.
But it’s low resolution.
It’s a nice way of thinking about a person.
Like if your brain is damaged you’ll bethere, but as a lower resolution representation
of yourself.
But it’s also a really nice way of thinkingabout what culture is.
You know, culture is this massive structureof multiple levels and domains, but it’s
reflected in each of us.
Like, we’re each partial carriers of it.
So we embody a partial representation of thestructure.
I mean literally, we embody it.
And then we also represent it abstractly.
And you know, part of the reason that yougo to a university is to, in some sense, improve
your capacity to articulate your structure.
Right, because you’re a cultural creature…it’s like, why are you the way you are?
Well, some of it is psychological, some ofit is sociological, some of it is historical.
Like a lot of it is historical.
So when you go and you study a social scienceor a humanity, you’re studying your own
personality.
Now, I wrote a paper a while back with a coupleof my graduate students, and I think it was
called The Entropy…
God, you’d think I would remember this…
The Entropy… doesn’t matter.
The hypothesis was, and this is somethingI’ve been think about for a long time, that
the world is very, very complex, and so whatthat means is that the act of getting from
one place to another is often very, very difficult.
And part of what you’re doing when you puttogether a functional sub-module is you’re
putting together a little routine that willenable you to transform some part of time
and space from what it is into what you wantit to be.
And in some sense what you’re doing is reducingthe complexity of that situation.
So imagine this, you’re going for your jobinterview.
And you’re knocking ‘em dead.
What happens?
Well, a whole bunch of possibilities, allthat set of possibilities that was concerning
you, starts to collapse towards a single solution.
And that single solution is, if you’re doingvery well in the interview, it’s a positive
solution.
So you’re anxiety disappears and it’sreplaced with positive emotion.
You get enthusiastic and excited, becausewhat’s happening in that room is that the
path to a desirable future is opening.
Now you can’t see any of this, you know,because we’re so blinded by the idea that
we see objects… we fail to perceive, inany articulated sense, what it is that we’re
actually dealing with.
And I think that one way of thinking aboutit is that you’re always on the edge of
something that’s potential, and that’swhere you exist.
You exist on this moving boundary of potential.
And you can interact with it such that youform it and it passes by you into the past.
And hopefully you’re forming it in a waythat is in concordance with your better health
and perhaps with the better health of thepeople around you, that would be optimal.
So you’re realising the potential in a genuine,non-metaphorical sense.
And that’s the thing about these representations,you know.
They’re often described as mythical, ormythological, or metaphorical.
But you know, they’re really not metaphorical.
Well, that’s not exactly right, becausethe Great Mother, the Great Father, they’re
partially metaphorical but the thing thatthey stand for as metaphors is something other
than the things that we conceptualise whenwe look at the world from an objective perspective.
Now, we’ve talked a little bit about thefigure of the Dragon of Chaos, and I think
that out of all the metaphorical images, it’sthe most difficult to grasp, because it’s
that which has not yet been encountered, soit’s neither unknown nor known.
And you think, well you can’t even describethat.
Yeah, but you can encounter it, and you canencounter it when you go into a situation
that’s radically new.
Let’s say it’s just the second beforeyou walk into a high-stakes interview, you
know, just before you open the door.
I would say that’s as close as you get,in a normal day, to a direct encounter with
the dragon of chaos, because you don’t knowwhat’s going to happen.
And to say, well, you’re in a room and there’sa door in front of you, you know it’s almost
moronic to think of it that way, right?
Because what the hell does that have to dowith anything?
It’s… what’s in there is unbelievably…like it’s the localisation of unbelievably
complex webs of causality.
That’s what’s waiting for you inside thatroom.
And then you might say, well is it structuredin any real way, and the answer to that is
not really.
It’s no more structured than… it’s evenless structured than a book you’re reading.
You know, if you’re reading a book you mightsay, well where’s the meaning in this book?
And the answer to that is, well it’s notin the book.
Like it’s partly there, because you needthe words and the sentences and the paragraphs
and all that, but you need the whole culturalcontext around it in order to interpret it.
So you’re not reading it blank.
You come to it with a set of, a very largeset of presuppositions.
Enough of them so that you can understandthe author.
Now maybe you can’t, and the book’s overyour head, or it’s badly written, but typically,
you come at it with the machinery in place,so that when you interact with the words and
the phrases and the sentences and so forth,revelations of new meaning pour forth.
And so, I don’t know how to say it any clearerthan that, that’s what the meaning of the
book is.
And it’s in the dialectical interactionbetween you and the book.
Well, if you walk into an interview room,it’s even less given, in some sense, than
the book, right.
Because what’s going to happen in there,which really means which of the many futures
that that room contains is going to manifestitself, depends very much on how you act.
So, it’s in that way that you collapse thepotential that’s in a particular place and
you extract something out of it that’s…well, and that’s when it gets tricky…
neutral, positive, or negative?
Maybe you bomb the interview, right?
And then you might say, well what’s happened?
What happened?
Well that’s a very complicated question.
Then you’re stuck with this hierarchy, right.
And that’s what you’re going to do whenyou go home.
You’re going to say “well maybe I didn’tdress properly, or maybe I didn’t get to
the interview on time, or they asked me abunch of questions I wasn’t prepared for,
or Jesus, I didn’t know anything about what’sgoing on, my whole education was a waste of
time, and what the hell am I doing”?
And then you might go “I’m never goingto get a job”.
And you know, you could say in some sensethat all of those hypotheses, as you move
up and down the hierarchy, you move from trivialtrouble to really not good trouble, as you
bounce, and all of that is an attempt to specify,in some sense, what that room contained.
And it’s not easy.
It’s weird too, because the room can containthings that alter your past.
Because maybe you say, well maybe you’regoing for a computer science job, maybe you’re
not, whatever.
You go in there and you think you’re thetop person in your class, and maybe you were,
but you know the people in there are so farahead of you that you can’t even imagine
ever catching up.
And you know, when you come out of there,the manner in which you construe your educational
history is going to be radically transformed.
So there’s a lot of trouble in that room.
There’s a lot.
Now one of the things we though in this paper…you can think of each of those little eggs,
they’re really eggs, as a container, andwhat they contain is entropy, trouble.
And the smaller ones contain smaller amountsof entropy and the bigger ones contain bigger
amounts of entropy.
And so, here’s another example.
You’re driving down the highway and yourcar sputters and grinds to a halt.
Maybe it makes a nice radical noise whileit’s doing it.
So okay, well, what happened?
Well the answer is, the simple answer is,your car malfunctioned and you had to pull
off the road.
That’s a really object-oriented analysis.
But what’s actually happened is that youhad a conceptualisation of the car as a pragmatic
tool, because what do you know about the damncar?
The car was an affordance, that’s the rightword, that would get you from point A to point
B, and you could have a very low-resolutionmodel of it, right?
It can just look like a plastic shell, whichis sort of what a car looks like.
And as long as you see how low-resolutionthat is, you could replace it with a cartoon
and you wouldn’t even notice.
That’s good enough representation as longas the thing is doing what it’s supposed
to be doing.
But as soon as it stops doing what it’ssupposed to be doing then it could be any
old thing.
And you think, well what does any old thingmean?
Well maybe you’re on a deserted highwayand it’s one o’clock in the morning.
And you know, someone pulls over to help you.
Okay, well, what’s that?
Well, you know, believe me, your imaginationwill rapidly span the world of possibility
from “oh good, someone’s come to help”to “I’m going to be dragged off in the
bush and killed”.
And that’s all contained in that sequenceof events.
And then even if no one does stop, and youhave to worry about exactly what’s gone
wrong, and you have to worry about how you’regoing to fix it and you have to worry about
the mechanic that might help you, and youhave to concern yourself with whether or not
you’re going to need a new car, and thenyou have to think about your finances.
It’s like, the idea that that car is a boundedentity, like it looks, is only true when it
works.
And as soon as it doesn’t work, then God,it’s any old thing.
And that, in some sense, is the dragon ofchaos.
Now, what seems to me to have happened…because you might think, well how did people
come to conceptualise such a thing, becauseI would think that, of all the things that
are difficult to conceptualise, the categoryof all things that you have not yet encountered
is the most difficult thing to discover, right?
It’s kind of like zero.
It took people a long time to figure out zero,and no wonder.
We need a symbol for nothing.
Well, this is even worse.
We need a representation for potential.
Well, you think, why?
Well it’s because it’s actually potentialthat you’re interacting with all the time.
Now what seems to me to have happened wasthat… you know, this is an evolutionary
just-so story, so I’m not assuming thatit worked precisely this way, but it doesn’t
matter.
Because I’m going to touch on the appropriatefeatures.
Well one of the things we know about socialanimals, generally speaking, and animals in
general, is that they have a territory, right?
And so you think, well what is their territoryexactly?
And you might say, well you can mark it out.
Here’s a… oh, what would have a territory?
Like a tiger, they’re pretty solitary, soit’ll be simple.
They have a big territory, right?
And it’s hundreds of square miles.
And the reason for that is, well they’retigers.
You can’t have like fifty of them, becausethey’ll just eat everything that’s there.
You know, you have to have a big territoryto support one apex predator.
So then you might say, well what exactly isthe territory of the tiger?
And you’d say well here are its boundaries.
This is where it roams.
But that’s not the right way of thinkingabout the territory of the tiger.
Because the territory of the tiger is actuallyall the places where, when the tiger does
its thing, the things that the tiger wantsor expects, happen.
That’s the tiger’s territory.
It’s the same with you.
You’re at home wherever you know what todo.
And what you’re doing when you know whatto do is you know how to match this hierarchy,
which is partly action-oriented, you knowhow to match the hierarchy with the situation.
So that when you put it into practice, thepotential that’s there transforms itself
into what you’re aiming at.
And that’s your territory.
And you need to think about it that way becauseyour territory can shift very rapidly on you,
and if you think about it geographically,it’s kind of confusing.
So let’s say you’re on the subway thatyou always take.
And then someone sits down beside you andthey’re muttering away madly and they have
a pretty malevolent look on their face.
And you get a glimpse inside their coat andthere’s a knife.
It’s like, you’re not in your territoryanymore!
And the fact that all of the objective entitiesare still there arrayed around you is just
a… it’s nothing more than a… it’sa delusion at that point to think that those
things characterise where you are.
Okay so, if you’re willing to consider territoryas that… it’s a space-time continuum,
okay?
And the reason I’m stressing that…
I mean, first of all, whatever reality is,is a space-time continuum, right?
It’s got three dimensions of space and onedimension of time.
And everyone knows that, as we sit here, moreor less stable in three dimensions, time flows
past us, in some sense.
And so the three-dimensional reality is transformingall by itself, just because of time.
Okay, and so when we’re mapping out ourterritories, we map out space-time territories.
And so, that means that not only do you knowwhere you are, you know when you are.
And if you’re in your territory you knowhow to act through that place and that time
so that you transform the potential that’sthere into whatever it is that you’re aiming
at.
Okay, so that’s your territory.
Now, that territory is isomorphic evolutionarilywith lots of things, which you could also
confuse geographically.
So you might think of a human territory assomething like… it’s probably, the fundamental
human territory is probably a fire.
And so the fire is a place of light in thedarkness and then you could think of rings,
concentric rings of relative safety surroundingthe fire.
So right beside the fire, where it’s warmand light and there’s lots of other people,
man that’s explored territory, you know?
But then if you start wandering away fromthe fire into the bush, especially if you’re
in a very biologically active area, then thefarther away you get from the fire the more
you’re going outside your territory.
And you can tell that’s happening becauseyour whole nervous system starts to function
differently.
What happens is that the nervous system partsthat you were using while you were in known
territory, they just shut down, and then othernervous system elements that you used in unknown
territory start to turn on.
And generally you’re not very happy aboutthat.
Because when you’re aware you’ve masteredthe territory, you can presume that neutral
or moderately good things are going to happen,with the possibility of something great now
and then.
But as you move away from that, it flips insome sense to “I don’t know what’s going
on here and I might fall” to “something’sgoing to bite me” to “I’m going to die
a painful death”, you know, and you don’tuse the same circuits to process the first
situation to process the first situation asyou do to process the second.
You don’t even like having the second oneon.
So you know what it’s like… maybe you’vebeen feeling a bit down, because that always
helps, and you wake up at three in the morningand you’re worrying about six things and
you hear some random noise somewhere thereshouldn’t be a random noise.
Well, how you feel right then, that’s whatit is like to have the system that deals with
the unexpected ‘on’.
You’re like a prey animal.
Really, really, exactly like one, becausethat’s what you actually are in many ways.
So you know, your whole biology transformsso that you’re prepared for God only knows
what.
Well, what seemed to have happened in thecourse of evolution was that, when we were
smaller creatures, and far after that, beforelet’s say we figured out how to use throwing
sticks and slings, and then later maybe bowsand arrows, or maybe even sticks, like, we
were getting eaten a lot.
I think I told you guys last week that theyjust discovered this damn cat in Africa that
looks like it preyed on our fore-bearers.
And we have pretty hard skulls so the normalcat can’t really gnaw through them, but
this cat had a special set of teeth, and ifit grabbed the front of your head it would
drive one of its teeth right through the backof your skull.
So you know, the hominids were preyed on enoughso that they had their own predators.
Well, so you know, that’s just not verypleasant.
And then, that’s by the time we were hominids.
You can go back farther than that to whenwe were little tree rats, roughly speaking,
and then all sorts of things were eating us.
There were a lot of reptiles back then, sixtymillion years ago, and they weren’t pleasant.
There were still dinosaurs around sixty millionyears ago.
You know, that’s a lot of evolutionary timefor us to have developed biological systems
that distinguish between places we’re safeand places we’re not safe.
Well, you roughly have one set of neuropsychological,neuropsychophysiological functions for familiar
territory and another set for unfamiliar territory.
Now what I would say… this is where thisbecomes, I think, radically different to terror
management theory, what these hierarchy isdoing when it’s functioning is shutting
off… is keeping a system that operates inunexplored territory shut off.
And you like that.
And that’s when you’re calm.
Like you are in here, you’re relativelyat home here, because you assume that you
know how to act here, as long as you sit andask questions more or less appropriately and
you don’t bother people and you don’ttalk on your phone, and various other things,
the probability that you’re going to confrontedby an angry primate or some other predator
is very, very low.
And so, you’d say, well you’re normal.
You feel like you do normally here.
But I would say the only reason you feel thatway normally to begin with is because you
don’t go places where you feel not normal.
You stay away from them.
And everyone knows what those places are like.
I saw a real cool example of this once.
I was down by OCAD at about midnight on aSaturday night.
You know, it was in the summer so there wereall these kids, really, wandering around in
their party clothes and going to the clubs.
And I was standing there watching and I lookedthrough a park at this street that runs by
near OCAD and there were these houses.
There was a row of houses and there were threehouses here and they were all really nicely
taken care of, then there was a house here,and then there were some more houses over
here that were well taken care of.
And that house in the middle was condemned.
So the roof was rotting and they’d boardedup all the windows, and the fence was falling
off and there was garbage in the yard, itwas a derelict place, you know.
So that’s kind of a spooky place.
Well, while I was standing there this guywalked down the street, and he was very intoxicated,
and he wasn’t very happy and he was sortof muttering to himself.
And he passed the three houses that were inpretty good shape, and then as soon as he
got in front of the house that was derelict,he just started to rant, and he was pounding
up and down and muttering paranoid things,and you know, sounding really dangerous.
But he kept more or less moving forward, andthen just after he got back past that borderline
and back into the more or less normal neighbourhood,he switched back to just mumbling quietly
and kept moving forward.
And you know he was just so damn intoxicated,there isn’t a possibility that he noticed
what had happened, but he was being cued bythe surroundings, you know, and it was a different
‘him’ when he was in unexplored territory,something that had degenerated back into chaos.
So the anger and aggression came out of himbecause that’s often necessary if you’re
going to be where there’s chaos.
You know, and chaos can burst forth, and does,all the time in people’s lives, you know.
If you’re sitting around the dinner tablewith your family, and everything’s going
pretty well but someone touches on one ofthose topics that you should just shut the
hell up about, it can take almost no timeat all before the whole thing unravels, and
then God only knows where you are.
And it’s not pleasant.
So instead of our belief systems protectingus from death anxiety, our hierarchical pragmatic
systems for interacting with the world stopthe parts of our brain that deal with the
unexpected from being on.
And they don’t do that because we believe,they do that because when we enact those structures,
all hell doesn’t break loose.
So there’s nothing illusory about it.
Now, you know, you might say, well, in thefinal analysis, does it really protect you
from chaos?
And you know, that’s an okay question, butmost of the time that’s irrelevant.
It isn’t always irrelevant, but most ofthe time it just doesn’t matter.
And the other thing is that much of the timeit doesn’t even matter if you believe this.
By which I would mean, you have an articulatedrepresentation of it, it’s also a self-representation,
and you carry that around, and maybe you havea crisis of faith and you don’t believe
in that, you still act all this stuff out.
And most of the time you’re still extremelywell-protected by it.
So it’s more robust than merely the articulatedor imagined version.
It’s a lot deeper than that.
It’s only a tiny part of its structure.
And so, we should never really talk about‘belief systems’ exactly, especially not
if they’re shared with very many other people,because they’re not structures of belief,
they’re much deeper structures than that.
And the belief part is only a pale reflectionof the underlying reality.
Okay, so that…
I presume that makes sense, and you can makesense of that in your own life.
You know, there’s other things that canhappen too that I should mention, is lots
of times people have chaos… you know, youthink your body is explored territory, it’s
sort of the ultimate explored territory.
But I would say, don’t get too convincedabout that.
That can also switch in a moment, and it happensto people all the time.
So if you get a tooth pulled, it takes yourtongue like three months to map the inside
of your mouth again.
So that’s re-familiarising your brain withthe new territory, right?
And that’s very, very complicated.
So your body representation is extremely complicated.
And it’s really easy to screw up.
So if you have someone go like that [crossesforearms and hands and fingers] and then you
point to one of their fingers in the middleand get them to move it (don’t touch it),
they often can’t, because just that’senough to boggle up their visual representation
of their body.
And so you can play all sorts of tricks onpeople that way.
So you know, your map of your body and yourbody are sort of reasonably well associated,
but they can be dissociated quite rapidly,and you know that happens when, maybe you
get a little hypochondriacal and start worryingabout your health.
Something’s bugging you and you don’texactly know what it is.
It’s like, well, all of a sudden you getalienated from your body.
And that can get really serious.
And I’ve seen people after a car accident,this was the most striking of this, this client
I had had her shoulder up like this [stiffensright shoulder].
And I noticed she never really looked in thedirection of that arm and when she moved it
she’d only move it about this far.
And after seeing her for a while I thought“oh, she’s afraid of that arm”.
Now it had been hurt.
Well why would you get afraid of your arm?
Well, it doesn’t act like it used to, sothat’s annoying.
And then when you move it wrong it hurts,and then you also don’t know that if you
move it wrong and it hurts, whether you’remaking it worse.
So then you just kind of ignore it, and thenit’s sort of your arm and sort of not your
arm.
And I had her at one point, we just practicedjust doing this [loosens shoulder].
I’d say, I’d do the action and say “canyou do this?”
[Raises left arm slightly].
She’d do it.
And then I’d go “well can you do this?”
[Raises arm slightly higher].
And she’d do it.
And then I’d say “can you do this?”
[Raises arm even higher].
We just kept doing this, it only took abouthalf an hour until she was up here [arm fully
raised], and she said “I haven’t put myarm up there for two years!”
And then I did the same thing with her shoulder.
I said, “Can you lift your shoulder?”
“No.”
“Can you lift it one-sixteenth of an inch?”
Well, she could do that.
Well, you know, sixteen times one-sixteenthof an inch is an inch, and that’s starting
to get there.
And you know, she did this a bunch and thenher arm went down.
So she’d been holding the damn arm up fortwo years.
Just try that.
You know, I mean you do this [raises arm]for five minutes and see what happens, just
hold your shoulder up there for two yearsand see what that does to the entire right
side of your body.
Like it’s really, really stressful.
And then I did something strange, then, whichwas a whim, but I think it was because I was
embodying her because I was paying so closeattention.
I asked her to come lean over my desk becausethere was something about the way she was
holding herself that was really bugging me.
And so I asked her just to lean over my deskand I pounded on her back down her spinal
cord and she drooped her shoulders again andthen she cried for about half an hour.
And again, it was because, she’d got hitby a car, that’s just how she was, she just
walked around like that, permanently, moreor less.
And we worked it out of her reasonably well.
But even your own damn body can become unexploredterritory.
And that’s another way of understandingthat yin-yang symbol, right?
You’ve got the black serpent, paisley, andit’s got a little white dot in it.
Which means that sometimes when things arereally broken all to hell a solution can come
blasting forth and chaos turns into order.
But more likely, you know, everything’sgoing pretty nicely and up something comes
and the chaos spills into the order.
And that’s the world you live in.
And that’s not a metaphor.
And it’s really interesting to know that,because then the question becomes “okay,
well, what do you do in order and what doyou do in chaos?’
Those are useful things to know.
We kind of know what to do in order becausethat sort of defines order.
But we don’t really know what to do in chaos,you know.
In fact the field of mental health is in somesense an attempt to figure that out.
But I can tell you some things to do whenyou’re in chaos.
So let’s say you’re dealing with someonewho’s very, very ill.
Or maybe it’s you that’s very, very ill.
And so God only knows what’s going to happenin the future.
Or even next week.
Well, the first thing you do is stop thinkingabout next week and the future.
Because it’s not calculable, right?
The pathways have become so multiple and souncontrollable that if you think about them
it’s just going to hurt you.
And so, you know, you can’t just not thinkabout it, because that doesn’t work.
But what you can do is narrow your time-frameof analysis.
You know, so instead of worrying about theweek, you think okay, well let’s make this
day as good as it can be.
And then if you’re really stressed, it’slike, no we’re going to really work on this
hour.
And so what happens is you hyper-attend tothe local space-time area and that’s what
you’ve got.
You can work with that.
And it really works.
Like if you’re dealing with people who aredying, for example, that’s what you do.
You zero in to the right level of resolution,fundamentally.
And you can tell when it’s the right levelof resolution because you don’t feel like
you don’t know what you’re doing anymore.
“What am I doing here, what am I supposedto do here, what does all this mean?”
You don’t feel that anymore.
Because those are the wrong questions at thatpoint in time.
And you know, maybe you try to make the personcomfortable, and you pay attention, so you
can take the right micro-movements and theright micro-attitudes in those critical moments,
and that’s what you do.
And so that’s one way of dealing with theunderworld and you need to know that, because
it’s going to happen.
So if you’re really stressed, you thinkabout smaller amounts of space and time.
And you try to get them right, it’s stillimportant to get it right, but the entropy
is so high at that point, the landscape isso complicated, that there’s no that you
can map more than a few moments at a time.
But it turns out often that that’s okay.
That’s good enough.
You know, obviously it’s not optimal, butone thing you can be sure of is you can take
a terrible situation and you can make it ahell of a lot worse.
So you know, if it’s a terrible situationand you manage it as well as it can be managed,
then maybe it’s only terrible.
But if you take a terrible situation and youmanage it really badly, then it can be something
that you never, ever recover from.
So, I’m not trying to be hyper-optimisticabout this, I know people go through rough
times.
But there’s a difference between tragedyand hell.
And tragedy is when something happens andyou’re awake.
And hell is when something terrible happensand you’re not awake.
And that’s a place you really don’t wantto go.
So then the death of your father could turninto the obliteration of your entire family.
Well, you know, the first is bad enough, butthe second might well be unbearable.
You know, because people often fight in circumstanceslike that, and the family gets very, very
stressed.
It’s very common, for example, if a couplehas a sick child or a child that dies that
they get divorced.
It’s not surprising, you know.
It’s not like they have a psychologicalproblem, they have a real problem.
And they might be amplifying it with theirpsychological problems, but all problems are
not psychological.
And that’s also useful to know, becauseif you end up somewhere that you don’t expect,
you’re going to be thinking (especiallyif you’re conscientious): “If I wasn’t
such a useless fool, I would have never endedup here”.
And there’s a much more pessimistic thoughtthan that that’s much more useful, which
is: whether you were a fool or not you weregoing to end up somewhere like this now and
then.
And you might think, God, that’s a horriblething to think, because that means that our
destinies are uncontrollable, at least inpart.
It’s like, yeah they are.
So partly what that means is prepare yourselffor that, and don’t pound yourself into
the ground when you get there.
Because it happens to people, and it isn’tnecessarily the case that the reason it happened
to you is because you’re useless.
Now, that might have furthered the processand all that, but you just don’t need those
thoughts at that time.
All they do is undermine you.
And when you know “yeah, you know, everybody’sdog dies” (which is true), it’s like,
well, it takes some of the guilt out of it,and the guilt is something that at that point
you don’t really need.
Okay, so, you’ve got your explored territory,and we’ve kind of walked through what that
is, and then you have your unexplored territory.
And then you have the things that sort ofexist on the fringe.
I would say in some sense the things thatexist on the fringe closer to the unknown,
those are usually symbolised by the TerribleMother.
And then the order is symbolised by the TerribleFather.
And then the chaos that’s beyond order…the unknown that’s beyond order and chaos,
that’s the Dragon of Chaos.
Now it’s a reptile, right, a reptilian carnivore.
It’s a reptilian carnivore that has a varietyof interesting properties.
So let me show you some of the pictures thatI’ve got of the dragon of chaos.
This is a good one.
So that’s a figure called an ‘Ouroboros’,and you can say in some sense that that’s
one of the first graphical representationsof the infinite.
You know, we have a symbol for infinity, right,which is another thing that’s pretty weird
to symbolise, because you’re encapsulatingsomething that can’t be encapsulated inside
a capsule, right.
It’s very sneaky to be able to do that.
And you actually need it to do advanced mathematicsof all sorts of kinds.
So it’s real, at least insofar as you canuse it as a tool.
So let me tell you a few things about thissymbol, this representation.
It’s kind of like the Judeo-Christian ideaof God being the Alpha and Omega.
Which is this thing that exists from the beginningof time all the way to the end of time.
So it’s something that exists outside oftime.
So you could think about this, at one level,as the eternal presence of The Predator.
Predators come and go; The Predator nevergoes away.
So it’s got this God-like… you could saythe spirit of The Predator never disappears.
And as soon as you think that way then youhave some idea about what archaic people were
doing when they were populating the worldwith spirits.
The difference between a spirit and an abstractidea is like, there’s no difference.
The spirit of The Predator inhabits the jungle.
It’s like, yeah, that’s for sure.
And you should be very careful of disturbingsuch spirits when you go in there.
Well so then you might ask yourself, well,what is a predator?
Well, that’s a complicated thing, becausewe would say, because we’re scientifically-minded,
that you can take predators and you can classifyaccording to their species and their sub-species
and their phyla and all that sort of thing,right.
We think about classifying them as objects,and then maybe in terms of their evolutionary
origins.
But that’s not very helpful.
You know, if something jumps out and wantsto eat you, I mean, knowing what it is might
help you plot your escape but all those additionalcomplexities, they’re just not the relevant
issue at that point.
The relevant issue is, how do you keep thepredators away from your explored territory?
Well, now that’s a complicated question,because you might say: what do you mean by
that?
Do you mean right now, while you’re walkingthrough the bush?
Do you mean right now for you and your family,while all of you are walking through the bush?
There’s this old joke about these two guysthat go out in the forest, and one guy says
to the other: “There’s grizzly bears here,so you have to be careful.”
And then the other guy says, “Well, howfast can you run?”
And the first guy says “Well, don’t youmean how fast does the grizzly bear run?”
And the other guy says “No that isn’twhat I mean I just want to know if I can run
faster than you.”
[Laughter].
Right, right.
So the reason I’m telling you that stupidjoke is because what you want as an answer
to a question depends on exactly how you putthe question.
And so, the answer there was “well I don’tcare if the grizzly bear eats someone as long
as it’s not me.”
Okay, fine, so that’s one answer to thequestion.
But then you might think, well let’s keepthe grizzly bears away from me now, my family
now, my tribe now, me tomorrow, my familytomorrow, my tribe tomorrow, then across the
week, then across the month, then across theyears, then maybe forever.
Okay so how is it that you have to act sothat you keep the predators away?
Well, that starts to become an extraordinarilycomplicated problem.
Because the simple solution might be, wellwhen there’s a predator around, climb a
tree or run into a hole, which is what lotsof animals do.
But it’s a pretty partial solution.
They don’t get eaten that day, but whatabout tomorrow, when the predator’s a little
hungrier.
It’s kind of a bone-headed solution, allthings considered.
So then you might say, well, if we thoughtof the spirit of the predator, which is more
like the fact that there is a class of predatorsand they’re never going to go away, then
the question that we have to answer is, howdo we act so that that class that’s eternal
doesn’t bother us any more than necessary?
Well that’s really complicated.
Really, really complicated.
Because it might mean, in some sense, well,how should you act?
Because conquering the problem of having yourterritory invaded, there’s not just reptilian
and mammalian predators, right, like bird-thingswith teeth, there’s other people.
And they’re a lot worse than anything elsethat’s going to come at you, so you also
have that problem, how do you keep yourselfaway from the predatory people and the foreign
tribes that are going to invade your landand take it.
So there’s no difference between that questionand how do you establish the security of a
nation, roughly speaking.
Or maybe even how do you establish peace?
You know what I mean?
It’s a question that doesn’t have obviousborders.
Okay, so one answer might be, stay away fromthe damn predators.
So you build a big wall, or someone else does,and you hide inside the walls.
Well, that’s not a bad solution, and ofcourse, that’s what people started to do
when they originally built cities, right?
They built these big walls, like Trump isgoing to build between Canada and the US,
and it’ll keep the predators out.
But of course, what do we know from the storyof Genesis, and from the Daoist symbol?
No matter how big the wall is, you can’tkeep out the damn snakes.
So you build a wall and all the snakes popup inside, so it’s not a very good solution.
And you know, that’s pretty obvious, right?
I mean, my suspicions are that mass shooterswho are native to the United States kill a
lot more people in the US every week thanillegal Mexican immigrants.
Well, so it’s like, what problem exactlyare you solving?
Okay, so the first question you have to solvewhen you’re… see there’s just no solution
to this problem [open doors in the classroom?][Laughter].
So, why did you laugh at that, do you think?
[Student: Because it opened again and it wasunexpected?]
Yeah, but why didn’t that terrify you?
Well, you know, it’s related to the hierarchyissue, right?
Because the door isn’t behaving properly.
So what’s funny about that?
Well, it’s funny to watch someone’s littleroutine not work when the consequences are
trivial.
It’s like, oh well he knows how to closethe door.
Hahaha it’s not working.
So now he’s got the problem of this doorand that’s a stupid problem, so everyone
can laugh about it, you know?
So, little anomalies, that you can bind quickly,are common.
And I think it’s an indication, to tellyou the truth, I think it’s an indication
of people’s transcendent ability.
Because what happens, comedians do this withyou too, you know.
So you’ll be sitting in the audience, andthe comedian will say this thing and then
this thing, and they’re connected in someway, but it’s not obvious.
And then you go, click!
And it’s like everybody celebrates theirbrilliance together, like “Oh I get it!
Hahaha!
Aren’t I smart?”
And it transforms you from the puzzled thinginto the solving thing.
And everyone really likes that.
It’s like, “Yes!
We solved it.
We can go and combat the unknown together.”
Okay, so you have this chaos thing here [pointsto figure].
As I said, that’s called an Ouroboros.
The reason it’s got its tail in its mouthis… it’s a… the idea that that’s trying
to represent is that this thing is completeunto itself.
So it’s a symbol of totality.
It’s everything.
How?
Well, you walk into the room where your interviewis.
You might say, what’s in there?
Well a better question is, what’s not inthere?
That’s a better question, because your wholedamn future’s in there.
And you don’t even know how much that branches.
Your future’s in there.
The future of your children is in there.
The future of your grandchildren is in there.
There’s these waves that go out from thatroom that in some sense, especially if you
stretch them forward in time, have almostno boundary.
You know, I mean, I don’t know, each ofus is descended from one person.
I don’t remember how many millions of yearsago, but it’s not that many.
Two?
Maybe it’s even earlier than that.
650,000 years?
Something like that.
So for all you know, one of you could be theperson through whom the entire human race
lived, and maybe it’s because you made theright decision in that interview.
My point is that potential itself has no boundary,no obvious boundary.
And you don’t know what you’re messingwith when you’re messing with it.
It’s very, very complicated.
So how should you do it?
Well, this figure says, well you better watchout, because some of it is predatory, and
it crawls along the ground, and it’s gotteeth, and it’s no damn joke.
And then you can think it’s sort of snake-like,because snakes sneak around through the grass.
And then it’s sort of crocodile-like, becausesnakes don’t have teeth but crocodiles sure
the hell do, and so do other predatory lizards.
And you know, as we’ve talked about before,the probability that our ancestral plains-dwelling
African ancestors were regularly lunched uponby crocodiles is pretty damn high.
Because how else would they get water?
And you’ve got to be pretty mean beforeyou can take on a Nile crocodile.
I mean, I’m sure we did that fairly earlyin our evolutionary history, but before that
a lot of us were snacks for lizards.
Which seems… just not good, you know?
So this thing also lives in a hole, dragonsusually live in holes or underground, like
Harry Potter’s basilisk.
And usually they’re immortal.
They live in a cave, they’re immortal, right?
They live forever, and you don’t want tobother them, because then they pop out of
their hole, like they do in The Hobbit, andthey come and burn down your village.
It’s like, leave the damn dragon alone.
Well, yes and no.
Why not leave it alone?
Well, maybe it would be better to go get thedragon before it gets you.
That’s certainly possible.
And then there’s this other weird thingabout dragons which is that they hoard treasure.
So maybe you can go and confront the dragonand you get the treasure.
And the treasure basically takes two forms.
So there’s the St. George story, where thetreasure is often a trapped, young female.
And the other version is the dragon sits ongold.
So what’s the whole idea there?
Well, maybe the best way to overcome the predator,the spirit of the predator, is to confront
it.
Well, that’s a hell of an idea.
Then you might think, well how deep an ideais that?
You confront the predator, you get the gold.
Well, this is that you confront infinite possibilityand you get the reward.
You encounter infinite possibility properly.
You derive from it the rewards that it offers.
What are the rewards that infinite possibilityoffers?
Who knows?
We have no idea.
And it’s so interesting, because we liveat a time in history where that’s literally
true.
Like I would hesitate to predict anythingabout fifty years from now.
I quit worrying about the future about twentyyears ago.
Because I thought, oh, I get it.
No matter what happens, the probability thatit’s something I predict is zero.
So it’s like, whatever you’re worriedabout, well, go ahead and worry about it,
but something completely different is goingto happen.
So it’s not really all that useful.
You should just be ready for whatever comes,because here it comes.
You know, like I think we’ll have fully-functionalautonomous robots within three or four years.
And that’s a real game-changer.
And God only knows what’s going to happenafter that.
Transplantable organs… those things are…you can print those on 3D printers already.
Well, augmented intelligence.
You all have augmented intelligence already.
What good are facts?
You just look them up, right?
Everyone’s an infinite supply of facts.
[Student: Can you explain, in different words,why the dragon is eating its own tail?]
Because it has everything it needs.
That’s another way of thinking about it.
So it’s self-contained.
It doesn’t need anything outside of itself,and there isn’t anything outside of itself.
So it doesn’t rely on anything to exist.
That’s another way of thinking about it.
It’s just there.
And so there’s an echo there of the ideathat… of an idea of beyond time.
Or I don’t know so much beyond space, butcertainly beyond time.
Time has no effect on it.
So it’s beyond time, in that sense.
Yeah?
[Student: There’s another reason it hasits tail in its mouth.
And that’s because it represents the borderbetween the known world, in all its goodness
and badness, and the unknown world.
And that border can get smaller as it eatsmore of its tail.]
Mhm, right, right.
Okay, so, now it has wings, why does it havewings?
Well, this is another horribly complicatedthing.
I’ll show you a diagram.
This is the closest I’ve been able to getto it.
I often don’t talk about this diagram, butI guess I am today.
Yeah, okay, we might as well go through thiscompletely.
Okay so here’s you.
So if you look right in the middle there,here I’ll make it bigger so that you can
see it.
You kind of think that you’re right here.
This is where your consciousness normallysits.
Like, you know, are you yourself, that’ssort of your conscious body envelope and all
that, or are you your family?
Well you know, the border there is ratherpliable.
Well then, you can drill down into the cell,and this is sort of the idea of hierarchy.
You know, you can look at principles, so thoseare your general philosophical beliefs and
then your programs, and the sequence of behavioursthat you instantiate that in and then your
behaviours.
And then you can go below that even and youcan think of yourself as… well because when
you’re behaving, what’s under that?
What’s the support for that?
The platform for that?
Well it’s your body, right?
Well, what’s there?
Well, once you get past the level of arm,it’s sort of like musculature.
And then you might say, what’s under that,what’s next?
Well you have your cellular structure, andso that’s what cellular biologists study,
God that’s so complex.
And then below that you have your molecularstructures, like DNA, and then underneath
that there’s the atomic structure.
And then underneath that there’s the sub-atomicstructure, and what are you going to say about
that?
There isn’t even time at that level.
And then you can do the same thing if yougo up.
It’s like, people say you shouldn’t justpay attention to your family, you’re in
a cultural group, they’re important too.
And well, what about the biological groupthat that’s nested in, and maybe you should
be paying more attention to the ecosystemrather than to yourself.
And you know, you shade upward into this thingthat you can’t really dissociate yourself
from either.
So that’s what you are, make no mistakeabout it.
Your consciousness is such that you only arelocated, in some sense, at one level of observation,
and God only knows why that is.
It’s almost as if being has to come to apinpoint in order for things to exist.
The way I’ve been thinking about it, insome sense, is you could take all of this
structure and you know, narrow it down toa single point of a pencil that’s writing.
And the writing is the transformation of potentialinto actuality, but in order to do that there
has to be a point of contact between you andthe potential, and that’s your body in part,
but it’s even narrower than that.
It’s whatever occupies this tiny littlelaser beam of attention while you’re wandering
through the world.
And it’s like burning reality into being.
So why that is, I mean, God, who knows?
It’s beyond strange.
Now, you know, one way of thinking about thiswhole structure is you could think about it
as the psychological world, because you’reat the centre of it, or you could think about
it as the spiritual world if you think aboutspirit as a matter of consciousness.
It’s not the material world anyways, orif it is it’s the material world insofar
as it’s you as a living conscious being.
So you know, we tend to separate out consciousnessand matter, right?
I mean, I’m conscious, that’s somethingweird.
We don’t think this table is so we thinkof them as separate substances in a sense,
spirit and matter.
Well that’s what the dragon is: it’s halfmatter, that’s the thing that’s crawling
around on the ground, and it’s half spirit,and that’s the wings.
And then you might say, well why the hellis the dragon half spirit and half matter?
Well we’ve got the spirit part, I just showedyou it.
So now I’m going to show you the matterpart.
Okay, so we could say, well what’s that?
Well it’s a chair.
You think, that’s pretty straightforward.
It’s actually not, and I can tell you whypretty rapidly.
Why is it a chair?
[Student: The legs?]
How about a beanbag?
Is that a chair?
That’s right because we can sit in it!
And that seems to be the fundamental issue:is this a chair?
Is this a chair?
[Points to desk][Student: It can be.]
It can be, yeah, yeah.
You’d say it’s not a canonical chair,and neither is a beanbag.
Because a chair could be a beanbag or a stump.
But you know, that’s sort of a canonicalchair.
But part of my point is, you know, the typicalanswer that people will give when you ask
“why is that a chair?” is that they’lllay out the objective structure, that’s
only a tiny bit of a chair.
You know, if it was that high, would it bea chair?
It has to have the right structure and theright function in order for it to be a chair.
And so what that means is that thing whichis an object is already only existing in relationship
to you, in some important sense.
But I could also say well, it’s part ofthe classroom.
What’s the classroom part of?
Well it’s part of Sid Smith.
This chair is part of Sid Smith.
And what’s Sid Smith part of?
Well it’s part of the university.
And what’s the university part of?
Well God, it’s part of all sorts of things,but we could say it’s a piece of the city,
it’s a chunk of the province, it’s a bitof the country, and then it’s nested inside
a much broader civilisation than that.
So that’s sort of going up from the chair.
And you could say, well, that’s not reallya chair, and I could say, well if that thing
was floating at some point halfway betweenthe Sun and Pluto, I don’t think considering
it a chair would be reasonable.
Because, well for obvious reasons.
You know, you can decontextualize somethingso completely that it isn’t what it is anymore.
It’s not that hard.
You know, and you kind of do that to yourselfwhen you say, well, who cares, why is this
important?
Who’s going to know in a million years?
Poof!
You’re decontextualized.
It’s a stupid trick, it’s like a partytrick for intellects.
It’s a stupid trick, you know?
Because anybody can do it?
And what does it mean?
It means you’re looking at it from the wrongperspective, that’s what it means.
So it’s not like it’s an ‘ultimate question’.
You wouldn’t be able to think about it infifteen seconds if it was an ultimate question.
But then you could do the same thing withthe chair that you did that you did with yourself
when you zoom in to it, right?
So it’s made of parts, well obviously, andthen the parts are made out of sub-parts and
so forth, all the way down to the sub-atomiclevel.
And the chair is all those things at the sametime.
Okay, so then you might say, well what doyou encounter when you encounter the unknown?
And that’s what you encounter, I think.
So let’s take a look at this.
And you can think about it.
It’s a weird idea.
Okay, so you’ve got your little frame ofreference, right?
You’re going from point A to point B. Andwhen you’re going from point A to point
B something that you didn’t want to happenhappens.
And we already know that it can be a littlething that happens, and then you know, haha
it’s funny, or it can be your whole worldfalls apart, and then it’s a catastrophe.
But let’s say it’s something like theinterview.
So I would say that’s sort of a mid-levelanomaly, right?
You walk in, there’s a lot in there, butyou can handle it, weirdly enough.
And I suppose that’s because there are otherplaces that you can go where there are potential
futures lying, so it’s not like you’reout of potential futures just because you
walk through that.
So you say, well, what’s in that room isanomalous, you don’t understand it.
It’s unformed matter.
Now you might say, someone might say, doesthis interview matter to you?
You think, that’s a pretty weird question,because things are made out of matter.
So what do you mean when you say does thismatter to you?
Well, partly what it means is that beforematter was our matter, it was a matter that
was more complicated, linguistically speaking.
So if you go back far enough, what peoplemeant by matter wasn’t this [raps on desk].
It was more like, I would say, it’s morelike potential.
Or it’s more like information.
That’s another way of thinking about it.
So you could certainly say that room is chock-fullof information.
So let’s go with the information idea, justfor the sake of argument.
We already talked about it as potential, let’stalk about it as information, both of those
work.
You walk in there and you start interactingwith people.
And then you leave later and you know, youtell your partner “Well I went for this
interview.”
And they say “How did it go?”
And you say “Well, it didn’t go very wellbut I learned some things.”
Because you could say that, right?
Well so I would say you went into that roomand you extracted some spirit out of the potential.
Now that’s exactly how Piaget looked atit by the way.
Well, I shouldn’t say ‘exactly’ becauseit’s probably not exactly the way he looked
at it.
But basically what Piaget proclaimed withchildren was that children will try out a
little routine, and then something will happenthat doesn’t fit in their little routine.
And so they’ll investigate it using whatevertools they have at hand.
Some of it’s trial and error, and some ofit’s… you know, they try out other tool-like
embodiments of their body that have workedin the past.
So for example, the first thing a nine-monthold will do crawling around on the floor if
it encounters something that’s roughly mouth-sizedis put it in their mouth.
Why?
Well they don’t know what it is, but theykind of know how to use their mouth.
So they throw it into their mouth, and thenthey tongue it, and they get some sense of
sort of how it tastes, which is very important,and what its shape is and all that, because
they’re very wired up in their mouth, andso they can investigate like mad.
And so what they encounter is a thing andthen when they throw it in their mouth they
practice doing something with it, you know,getting its shape, so now they know something
about it.
So that changes them from a spiritual perspective,a psychological perspective.
Now they’re slightly different than theywere, they’ve incorporated some information,
and they’ve also transformed the thing intoa specific thing with specific features.
And so what you might say is that out of potentialspirit and matter arise.
And that’s a very interesting way of lookingat it.
Also it fits well with the phenomenologicalphilosophers.
Because they believe that we encountered phenomenaand phenomena were those things that shone
forth.
And so that’s like a reversion to the ideaof meaning.
Because you’ve got to think about it thisway too… it’s like when you walk into
a library, God, what’s in there?
Well, it’s inexhaustible, a library.
Well, how come you just don’t get exhausted?
Well, it’s because you’re not actuallyinteracting with the whole library.
You’ve got this focal point like a laseragain, and you’ve made it into a focal point
because you’re inside that hierarchicalstructure, right?
So you say, well I’m in the library to getthis book, I’m getting this book to read
this chapter.
So chapter, book, library.
I’m going to university, I need to becomeeducated and get a job so I’ll be a good
citizen and a good person.
And so that’s what you’re doing in thelibrary.
You’re just doing one little fragment ofthat.
And the more you have that whole model developed,right, all the way from good person all the
way down to why you’re in the library, themore precise your aim is, the more you know
what you’re doing, the less encumbered bydoubt and uncertainty you are, and the higher
probability you have of focusing on your taskand then writing the path that you want to
be into being.
And so, well, so it’s very useful to thinkabout things this way and it’s also very
interesting to note that that’s how youact.
You actually act like the world is made thisway.
And it’s even weirder because, and thisis the case I made for you when we were talking
about the structure of the brain.
It actually looks like this is how your brainconstrues the world.
Because you have systems, you’ve got a systemthat works when you know what you’re doing
and you’ve got the other system that workswhen you don’t know what you’re doing.
And so basically the world is divided, justlike the Daoists say, into the orderly domain
and the chaotic domain.
And you need to know how to operate in both,and you need to balance them.
And you need to transform one into the other.
And that’s basically what you’re doingwhen you’re interacting with reality.
And you know, one of the things that I willclaim, and this will become more important
as the course progresses, is that when you’redoing something meaningful, you’re doing
that properly.
And the sense of meaning that you have, isactually an indication that your psychophysiology
is manifesting that you’re in the rightplace at the right time doing the right thing.
And it’s real.
It’s not only real, it’s like it’s themost real thing.
It’s where potential is transformed intoreality.
And it’s hard to get any more real thanthat.
So that’s partly why I’m telling you thatthese things aren’t exactly metaphors, you
know.
They have to be represented by metaphor insome sense.
But the reality that’s underlying them…it’s not just a story.
Even though it is a story, it’s not justa story.
It’s a real representation of reality.
So, you know, the other thing I kind of outlinedhere is that when you hit an anomaly… you
know an anomaly is sort of the thing fromwhich everything shines forth, when it’s
still really anomalous what happens is thatit manifests itself to you in sort of like
a burst of contradictory meanings.
And that can be paralysing.
You know, you could be really, really, reallyexcited and really, really, really nervous.
Which might happen, for example, if you weregoing to a job interview and you actually
wanted the job.
It would be even worse if you went to a jobinterview and like 30% of you wanted the job
because that’s the 30% of you that wantsto develop, and another 30% would just as
soon fail so that you can crawl under yourbed at home and stay there with the dust bunnies
until you’re forty.
And another 25% of you is resentful aboutthe fact that you have to get a stupid job
at all.
And so then you go in there and it’s really,really complicated.
Because not only is all that potential therebut you’re fractured and those fractures
make the whole situation way more complicatedand unstable than it would otherwise have
to be.
And that happens to people all the time.
I mean, people hedge their bets in job interviewsall the time.
Because they think “eh, I don’t reallycare.”
It’s like no, you care.
You just want to have a story to tell yourselfif you fail.
Well, and then if you have that story, wellthen probably you’re going to fail, because
you don’t get to do that.
You can’t go in there at 60% and hope towin.
You have to go in there at 100%.
Now that’s cool too, because what it impliesis just what the clinical psychologists have
been telling people for sixty years or seventyyears.
You have to voluntarily face the things thatyou’re afraid of.
Now it’s a little more complicated thanthat because otherwise you could just go play
in traffic.
So it’s not a call to stupid adventure.
What it does is assume that you’ve got adirection and the direction is a valid direction.
And then what happens is, as you pursue that,obstacles emerge, anomalous, threatening obstacles,
and then you either confront them, or youabandon the whole project.
Well generally speaking if you chop them intolittle pieces then you can confront them and
digest them.
And then you get stronger because you’redoing all this digesting.
It’s like you’re eating the monster ofchaos.
And that’s a classic metaphor for developingwisdom to ingest.
Piaget even uses that, right?
Assimilate.
It’s exactly the same idea as ingesting.
What you’re eating is information insteadof matter.
And the information restructures you and makesyou more informed.
And that puts you more in formation.
So you know you encounter the anomaly andit’s a burst of contradictory potential,
and so that’s exactly how you respond toit.
Your body’s going everywhere at once, becauseGod only knows what’s going to happen.
And then as you interact with it, it collapses.
You’re collapsing it.
That’s what happens when you take controlof the situation.
And then you reduce it to a single path whereeverything is going properly.
And you might say well you’re bending itto your own selfish will, but that’s not
right.
Because if you’re in… let’s say you’rein an interview and there’s five or six
people in there, you can’t just bend thedamn thing to your will, because you have
to interact with those people.
And so if you don’t do that with… youknow, you could be a psychopath and manipulate,
but that’ll only work for a short periodof time, you’ll get caught, and then you’ll
have to move, because that’s what psychopathsdo, that’s how they keep being psychopaths.
They exhaust everyone’s trust and then theyhave to move.
And then they go find some other people whoare trustworthy because they build up trust
capital with other people and then they betraythem.
But they have to keep moving.
So it’s an unstable solution.
So you go in there and you do it properly.
Well what are you doing exactly?
You know?
I would say that if you’re really, reallynailing that interview, you’re saying, well
here’s a future that we could all marchtogether into confidently and happily.
That’s what you’re saying.
And I’m the person to do that.
Now you might be saying that on a relativelylow scale.
Like, if I’m your assistant you’re nevergoing to have to worry about me.
Because I’m always going to be there.
And then maybe if you’re the CEO, you’regoing to say well, you know, this is the way
that all of us are going, and here’s why,and this is what it’s going to look like.
And the better you are at that, the more thatpotential will turn into… it multiplies,
that’s what happens.
If you’re good at dealing with it the potentialthat’s accessible to you multiplies.
Which is really cool.
And also how you’d hope it would be.
Because you know, you’d hope that more potentialwould manifest itself to people who are more
competent.
Well, if things work well that would be good.
So that’s the spirit and matter idea.
And so that’s represented in that dragon.
So let’s go back to it.
Now, okay, so you remember this characterhere.
So what to do about that?
What to do about chaos?
Well one thing you might want to start bydoing is admitting that it exists.
So let’s say that you’re not a terrormanagement advocate.
Let’s say you’re an advocate of positiveillusions.
Does everyone know what those are?
Are you still taught about those in socialpsychology, positive illusions?
Yes?
No.
How many people know about them?
Okay, where did you learn about them?
[Student: In your class, PSY230.]
In 230?
No one else has taught you about this?
Anybody else learn it anywhere else?
[Student: I learned it online.]
You learned it online.
Okay, well thank God for that.
Well, what happened was, the paper where positiveillusions were first touted, and that was
in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,it was the most cited… was it the most cited
paper ever in social psychology?
It’s up there.
And it’s an appalling paper!
Because it basically says… it says somethinglike this, if you scrape away all the nonsense:
things are so horrible that if you just lookedat them, you’ll be so depressed you’ll
want to die.
So you better not.
You better weave around yourself an illusionthat things are better than they are and that
you’re more powerful and wonderful thanyou actually are.
And if you do that, but not too much, thenyou’re going to be happier.
Well, you know, the errors in that are justmanifold.
First it’s like, well, who cares if you’rehappy, what the hell does that have to do
with anything?
You’d be happy stepping on ants.
[Laughter].
Well really!
It’s like what the hell stupid idea is that?
You’ve got positive emotion.
Cocaine will do that.
You know, bullies are pretty happy when they’repounding out someone like Milhouse.
So you know, happiness, what the hell’sthat?
It’s shallow.
It’s a dopey idea.
And then, well, how big should these liesthat you’re telling yourself be?
And the answer to that is just exactly thesize that will make you happy.
Well that’s not helpful, because if you’regoing to have a theory, let’s hear about
exactly how big they should be.
Well sometimes they should be this big andother times they should be this big, but there’s
no real way of telling a priori.
Well so that’s not really very helpful either.
And then there’s another idea underneaththat that’s even worse, which is reality
is so awful that you can’t look at it.
Well that’s nasty man, because that means(and that’s what the positive illusion stuff
meant, sort of like the terror managementtheorists) if you got an unvarnished look
at reality, it would just destroy you.
Because you’re not strong enough to lookat reality in an unvarnished manner.
Well, you can imagine why people would believethat.
You could think God yes, it’s pretty damnawful.
But then you think, well wait a minute.
Is it really the case that everyone who’sout there coping with the world is blind and
deluded?
Or maybe is it that the people who are notcoping with the world very well are blind
and deluded?
I mean, ask yourself that.
You’ve seen people in your life that youadmire, I presume, and certainly you’ve
seen people you don’t admire.
Well, so let’s take the ones you don’tadmire.
Well, how about blind and deluded, does thatpartially describe them?
It would be blind, deluded, bitter, resentful,and mean.
That sort of covers the territory.
And then the people you admire?
Well, they’re strong people, generally.
They can do things that are really, ridiculouslydifficult, like have a baby, and raise it
without destroying it.
Or work in a palliative care ward or be anurse in a cancer ward for children.
I mean, there’s a lot of awful things.
I talked to this guy the other day.
I just met him sort of randomly.
And he had had a motorcycle accident.
And it was a bad one.
He rolled like 200 feet at 60 miles an hourand he broke seven ribs and you know, had
a brain hemorrhage.
Like it really took it out of him.
He was a good athlete before that.
And so it probably aged him twenty years.
And he’s still recovering.
And he was telling me, he works for a powercompany, and so he’s climbing up these power
poles, you know, because that’s part ofhis job.
Well now he’s pretty screwed up.
He’s in his mid-fifties, he’s still climbingup power poles.
And he was working with a guy who had Parkinson’sdisease.
And so the guy with the Parkinson’s diseaseis at the top of the power pole and he’s
doing his job.
And he’s getting shaky, so they’re afraidthings are going to fall, and then this guy
comes up behind him to help him.
He’s only really got one arm that works.
It’s like, Jesus, that’s tough.
Those people are tough, man.
You know, because Parkinson’s?
That sucks.
And well, so does having half your arm moreor less destroyed by a motorcycle accident
and not staying at home hiding under the bed.
You know, they’re out there still makingsure the lights are on.
Well, that’s a pretty unvarnished confrontationwith reality as far as I’m concerned.
You know, so I could say… alright, so here’sanother story.
So, I’ve probably told you a little bitabout this before.
When the behaviourists first proposed thatyou could use exposure to treat anxiety, the
psychoanalysts were all skeptical about that,because they thought, well you’re just treating
the symptom.
They usually thought of a phobia as the manifestation,the visible manifestation of something that
lurked more deeply underground.
And there’s real truth in that.
Like, whatever a mouse is to someone that’smouse-phobic isn’t what a mouse is to you.
The mouse is a bunch of other things, becauseotherwise they wouldn’t be afraid of it.
And so all those… you could say the mouseis an exemplar of the category of all things
that they’re afraid of.
And that’s a good way of thinking what thatmight mean symbolically.
And so I had one client who was afraid ofmice, and she thought one would run up her
leg.
And she was also afraid of being raped.
And those two things were… there was a metaphoricalunion between them, even though they’re
obviously not exactly the same.
So the psychoanalysts, they’re making theirpoint, you know.
But it turned out that… so the originalbehavioural theory was you can’t be anxious
and calm at the same time.
So what you do first, if you’re going toteach someone to not be afraid of a mouse,
is teach them how not to be afraid.
So you put them in a chair and you do a relaxationexercise with them, and then you show them
a picture of a mouse.
And you say, just breathe, you know, calmdown.
And so they calm down.
And then sooner or later they can look atthe pictures of mice by themselves, and then
maybe you could throw a stuffed mouse at them,and then maybe they could walk by a pet store
and look at a mouse, and so on and so forth,till you get them holding rats.
And so, you know, that works.
But it works even if you don’t relax.
In fact it works just as well.
So the old behavioural idea that it was counter-conditioningwas wrong, just like the idea that the reason
that you were afraid of a rat was becauseof conditioning.
It’s like, of course you’re afraid ofa rat, it’s a rat.
Just like you’re afraid of snakes, you know,to a lesser or greater degree.
And people actually become more afraid ofsnakes as they get older, interestingly enough.
Which is not what you really expect, right,unless it was a biological function.
So anyways, all you have to do is show peoplethe thing they’re afraid of.
And what do they learn?
They don’t learn that the thing isn’tfrightening.
They learn that they’re tough.
And so one of the things… and that’s whyit generalises, which is… see the psychoanalysts
predicted that what would happen is, well,you know, yeah, yeah, you’re not afraid
of a mouse anymore, but you’re twice asafraid of being raped in your cabin when you’re
up there alone.
It’s like no, that isn’t what happens.
You’re not afraid of the mouse anymore andyou’re half as afraid of being alone up
in your cabin.
It generalises.
And so if you take someone who’s agoraphobicand they’re in their mid-forties, and somewhat
dependent, and you treat them for agoraphobia,then they’ll go home and give their husband
hell (because they’re usually women), andtell them all the things that they’ve been
wanting to tell them for twenty years buthave been too afraid to because they thought
he might leave.
And then they were afraid that he’d leaveand they’d fall apart and all of that.
So they get… you teach them that they don’thave to run out of a subway and all of a sudden
they get more confrontational.
And the reason for that is because they getmore courageous.
And the reason for that is they go do somethingdifficult and they watch themselves and hey,
they could do it.
And so one of the things you might ask aboutyourself is, how do you know what you have
to run away from?
You know, you might be so damn tough you justcan’t bloody well imagine it, and you’re
just sort of sheltered.
Now, look, you’re a lot less sheltered thanyou were when you were three, I presume.
How many of you live on your own?
Okay, now, that was a transition, I presume.
How many of you were depressed and anxioustheir first year of university?
Okay, how many of you weren’t?
Okay, so it’s about 50%.
Well that’s about right.
About a third of first-year UofT meet clinicalcriteria for depression according to the Beck
Depression Inventory.
Well why?
Well it’s hard.
You know, you leave your family, you’rekind of protected there, you go out, you have
to figure out all the things you have to doto keep yourself alive and then you have to
go to university and they’re going to giveyou an impossible amount of work that no one
could ever possibly master.
So it’s daunting.
And then you’re surrounded by people whoare smarter than the people you’re used
to being surrounded by.
So that means that you’re not as smart asyou thought you were.
And then you meet people now and then whoare way smarter than you and way harder-working
and way better-looking and all of those things.
So you know, it’s depressing.
But by the same token, how many of you feelless armed to take on the world than you did
five years ago?
You’re not going to admit it, probably,but I presume that that’s a very small number.
How many of you feel more prepared?
Okay, okay, so that’s pretty cool.
So what that means is that you went out thereand did a whole bunch of difficult things.
And some of those things… you’ve beenreading each other’s autobiographies right?
How’s that going?
Has it been interesting?
Yeah, has it been worthwhile?
Anybody think it isn’t worthwhile?
I really want to know, you know, because it’skind of an experiment, in some sense, to see
how this is working.
What’s good about it?
[Student: That you can get to know a strangeron the deepest level possible.]
So why do you like that?
[Student: Because it makes the class feelmore…]
Yeah you know I’m thinking about workingwith a company in Edmonton that is setting
that up as a way of increasing trust amongpeople who work together in the same company.
They’re not really sharing their deepestsecrets, but what they will be doing is having
structured conversations where they find outa little bit about each other.
You know, and it’s sort of… it seems liketo have a relationship with someone you have
to get to know their hierarchical structure,right?
And it’s just like… like the tiniest thingswhile that person sits at the desk and types,
well, it’s a shallow relationship.
And if it’s a deep relationship you knowmuch more about the whole structure, right?
Which is I think why the metaphor of depthworks so well.
Okay, so you feel like it catalysed the classrooma little bit more, is that right?
[Student: Yeah, and isn’t it like you fallin love with someone… this isn’t about
falling in love, but you fall in love withsomeone when they’re vulnerable?]
Yeah so that’s interesting too eh aboutthe whole vulnerability issue.
Yeah it’s like, if you’re forming a relationshipwith someone what you do is you basically
mutually open up your shells you know.
Or basically you kind of go like this [opensand closes hands].
And if it has to close permanently well thenyou go.
Yeah well that’s another interesting thingtoo because what it implies is that unless,
you know, you voluntarily expose your vulnerabilitiesyou’ll never find a partner, or they won’t
be a real partner because they don’t knowwho the hell you are.
And then you’re weak because there’s onlyone of you.
Yeah?
[Student: And the beauty in that is that it’scompletely anonymous too.]
Yeah and so why do you like that?
[Student: Because I can share my deepest secretsbut not feel like anyone will…]
You know there’s some evidence that peoplelike computer-guided psychotherapy.
For exactly that reason.
You can be completely honest with the computerbecause it doesn’t care.
Not yet.
It will soon but, but it probably won’tjudge you any more harshly than you set it
to.
It’s like, love and affection today.
[Laughter].
Yeah, well that won’t be very far away.
Okay so what do other people have to say aboutthe autobiography?
Yeah?
[Student: I found it really interesting becauseI never personally know so deeply what another
person thinks, because we don’t share thatmuch… we talk about the beginning of childhood
up to this point, we never really have thatconversation with anyone else.]
So you like that too.
[Student: Yeah I like it a lot.]
Why?
What was good about it for you?
[Student: Usually as we move through stagesin our life we only interact with our age,
we never see them holistically.
But watching them grow, it’s kind of like,very strange, because we don’t see people
that way.]
Right, well you’re seeing more of this eh?
[Points to Ouroboros image].
Because the person actually extends acrosstime, and you’re right, all you see is a
slice.
Well they’re not a slice, they’re a wholedamn thing, this thing that grows across time.
Okay, who else has something to say that’sinteresting?
[Laughter].
Haha, half the people don’t want to talknow.
So, anybody else?
[Student: After doing that and writing somany things about myself, I was actually talking
about the assignment with a couple of my friends,and I really thought, I’d actually be okay
if the people who read my assignment identifiedwho I was and like, even engaged in conversation
with me.
And it really inspired me to be more honestabout sharing myself in my existing relationships.]
So why did you conclude that it would be okayif someone identified you?
[Student: Because I felt a desire to be seenmore.
And it was kind of…
I felt more with myself when I was disclosingmore information about myself.
And so it made me want to be more with myselfin my existing relationships.]
Okay, that was a very good observation.
I’m going to say a couple of things aboutthat and you tell me if you think they’re
accurate.
Okay so the first thing is, it’s an actof courage to, haha, expose yourself to someone…
no we’re not going to say that precisely.
It’s an act of courage to be truthful withsomeone.
Because they’re actually interacting withthe actual you.
So there’s no façade.
So that’s one thing.
So you get more courageous.
But then the next thing might be…
I would say that you have a more sympatheticrelationship with yourself.
Because let’s say you have this stupid memoryabout something dumb that you did when you
were 13.
And you’re still carrying that along.
It’s like, Jesus, you were 13, what thehell do you expect?
13-year-olds are just dumb as sticks, they’regoing to do all sorts of stupid things.
Their brains are all addled from hormonesand they’re trapped in those little educational
prisons.
So they’re going to do stupid things.
But if you’re carrying that it’s likeit’s you that did that.
It’s not some stupid 13-year-old that youonce were.
And so then you can start to see yourselfin perspective, you know, as a 13-year-old
like other 13-year-olds.
No better, but perhaps no worse.
So you can get on your side, in some sense,by walking through your story and seeing what
the causal elements are.
Does that seem reasonable?
Okay, okay, yeah, well so that’s a goodthing.
[Student: I think…
I really liked it, again, because you reallyget to know other people and I really liked
that.
I think that it was also interesting thatother people not necessarily knew more about
you than you did, but they contemplated theinformation that you gave them…
like I know that someone looked at somethingthat I’d written in a completely different
light than I did, and I thought that was sointeresting.
Just like, the idea of kind of looking atit a little bit more from the outside, and
getting a different perspective on it.]
Right, well that’s… what’s the famouspoem on the best gift we can possibly be given
is to see ourselves as others see us?
I think it’s Robbie Burns and I just mangledthe hell out of it.
But yeah, you do get that opportunity, andit’s weird.
And this is something the positive illusionpeople never think about either.
It’s that sometimes people think they’rebetter than they are, like objectively, whatever
that means.
But lots of times the opposite is true, andI think it’s often it’s true even more
often.
It’s like, people think they’re a lotworse than they are.
No one’s as anxious as me or as concernedabout X or is as confused about this or as
socially awkward, or is not funny, or youknow, everybody’s got their paranoia about
this part of them that’s the worst thatanyone could possibly be in the entire world
and it’s almost never true.
Other people are a lot more like that thanyou think.
And they’re running around trying to hideit madly as well.
So that’s a good thing.
Well you know, you’re also allowing yourself…in some sense you’re allowing yourself up
into the light.
You go through your life and you think, wellI can allow other people…