We’re gonna review a proposition.
Now, if I ever tell you something in enoughdetail that you've already heard that you’ve
heard it enough, please tell me because Ican’t precisely remember what I told you.
I know the line of the narrative throughoutthe entire course, and we will return to some
things fairly frequently, but I don't wantto tell you the same story three times, unless
you’re particularly compelled by that story.
So let me know.
We’re going to start with a proposition,and the proposition is that in order to orient
yourself properly in life, there's two classesof information you have to have access to.
One class of information is information aboutthe nature of the objective world, and the
objective world is described in a manner - orthe world when it is treated objectively - is
described in a manner that strips all thesubjectivity from it.
That’s the technology.
The philosophical technology that's behindthe Scientific Revolution - involves stripping
the subjectivity from the sense mediated consequencesof certain kinds of actions because when you
lay out an experiment, you're not just talkingabout what happened, you're talking about
what you did and then what happened.
And you're supposed to be able to do it ina way that ensures that if someone else followed
the exact same procedure, they would obviouslyobserve the same consequences.
And, in some sense, we’re trying to establisha realm of knowledge that is universally applicable
to people despite their individual differences.
That's one way of thinking about it, and obviouslythat works.
Whether or not it works in a Darwinian sense,we still have to determine because it could
easily be that our development of the scientificmethod is what will make us go extinct, under
which circumstances you might consider itto have been an error.
But it doesn't really matter at the momentbecause so far so good, roughly speaking.
Now, people think the world is an objectiveplace because we can describe it objectively,
and that's a much more debatable presupposition.
It’s partly debatable because it's actuallybased on a decision in some sense, rather
than evidence, partly because your knowledgeis finite in every direction in some sense.
So what that means in a way is no matter whatyou know about anything, you don't know everything
about that thing.
And so, you kind of ground out in ignoranceat some point.
So what means is you that you have to buttressyour thinking with a set of assumptions that
you don't question or you just end up in aninfinite regress.
One of those sets of assumptions is usuallyreality definition sets of assumptions, or
truth definition sets of assumptions, butthe thing is generally no matter what your
theory of reality is, or what your theoryof truth is, there are alternative theories
of reality and alternative theories of truththat are equally rigorous and that have different
domains of application.
And it’s a very tricky business, so forexample, if you're a reductionist materialist,
you're going to make the presupposition thatbrain physiology is more real than emotional
experience.
I suppose that's in some sense because youcan't get access to someone else’s emotional
experiences, at least not directly whereasyou can get universal access to the fundamental
details of someone’s brain physiology.
It’s something like that.
Anyways now, that's still an arbitrary assumptionbecause the person and you as well are going
to be acting all the time as if your emotionsand motivational states are real and so then
you run into a problem and the problem iswell, how do you know what someone actually
believes?
You listen to what they say or do you listento their explicit and well articulated theories,
or do you watch how they act?
And the answer to that is, you make your choiceand generally there are reasons for that.
Now, one of the conceptual tools that I havefound helpful in my attempts to avoid confusion
when dealing with the fact that there arevery many ways of looking at the world is
to start thinking about theories of realityas tools rather than descriptions and I find
that extraordinarily useful as a metaphor.
If you have a toolbox full of tools, you don'tnecessarily try to reduce the utility of one
tool to another and you don't actually complainthat all tools aren't the same.
A wrench isn't a very good hammer, but thatdoesn't mean you can criticize it on that
grounds.
You might not want to use it as a hammer,although you could I suppose, but it’s not
a justifiable criticism, and it looks to me- and this is something that a psychologist
named George Kelly pointed out as well, althoughI think it’s also an element of pragmatic
philosophy is that one set of tools for onething, and another set of tools for another
thing.
That’s helpful, that’s helpful.
And then you are also thinking about the sortsof problems that you might solve with different
forms of tools, and one problem is what arethings made of - in an objective sense let’s
say.
And another problem might be what is the landscapeof experience, and that's more of a phenomenological
problem.
That’s the problem the phenomenologistsset out, and then the other problem might
be how do you, and should you conduct yourself.
And it could easily be that you can't usethe same tool to solve all of those problems,
and I would say particularly true, technically,when you're dealing with science because science
in its very nature refuses to answer questionsabout what it is that you should do, apart
from some implicit assumption that you shoulddo science which is actually not -
Well that’s actually not a scientific assumption,by the way, because it’s a moral assumption,
and the moral assumption is that if you conductyourself in a scientific manner, things will
be better because why would you run arounddoing science to make things worse, although
you absolutely can.
And, we perhaps are, and even if we aren’t,we still might.
So that's one of the things I find quite interestingabout the scientific endeavor, and this is
something Jung observed was that it had tobe nested in something outside of itself to
be given its motive force.
It had to be nested in a system of moral assumptions,and the fundamental moral assumption is the
world will be a better place if we conductourselves along scientific lines, because
why do it?
And that's a statement that cannot be analyzedfrom within the confines of the scientific
worldview because it doesn't analyze thosesorts of questions.
Now, you can say they're not real, but that'sa stupid answer because - I think it’s a
cop out, maybe it’s not a stupid answers,but it probably is.
At least it’s a cop out because if you don'ttake that question seriously, you can't really
justify engaging in the activity.
So you could refuse to answer it but you'rebasically answering it by engaging in the
activity anyways so even if you're not sayingit, you're still justifying it.
Assuming you can draw conclusions from people’sactions like you can from their statements
- and it’s hard to really dispute that Iwould say.
If you're wise, in fact, I think you derivemore conclusions from their actions than their
statements.
So that’s the underbelly of the first proposition,and the development of that is something like
the means by which information is transmittedthat is relevant to the domain of behavior
is not the same means by which it’s transmitted- by which scientific information is transmitted.
And we kinda know that too, without any realdebate, I believe, because how old do you
think science is as a technical endeavor?
What would you estimate?
Hundreds of years.
Maybe thousands of years if you’re willingto give the Greeks some credit, but really
probably not.
Probably hundreds because Aristotle wasn'ta scientist - like he wasn't a bad observer,
but he certainly wasn't an empirical observer,and no one got science straightened out till
what - Newton, Descartes, Bacon, and you knowthere's a handful of other characters who
were thinking around that period of time.
They sort of established the proper methods,really, and also the philosophy that underlies
it.
It’s not very old.
Six hundred years, you know, five hundredyears.
That’s really nothing.
It’s the blink of an eye.
It’s yesterday, if that.
It might even be an hour ago.
It’s nothing, but obviously people weretransmitting information about how to act
to each other for untold millennia beforethat, and it’s probably more like - it depends
on what you're willing to consider transmissionof information, but even octopi couldn't imitate,
and they're the smartest invertebrate.
They’re quite bright, those things.
They only live a couple of years so they can'treally get things going.
They can problem solve.
They can pull corks out of bottles to getlike a crab in a bottle, and if they watch
an octopus - if an octopus watches anotheroctopus pull a cork out of a bottle to get
a tasty crab, then that octopus knows howto do it, which is pretty impressive.
And you could kind of see why octopi can kindof do that because not only do they have a
brain, but they also have little tentacle-yappendages which allow them to manipulate
things.
So, one of the precursors to being able tobe intelligent in any act of way is that you
have to have tentacle-y appendages so youcan manipulate the world.
At least for it to be anything resemblingwhat we would consider to be intelligence,
and that's part of the reason dolphins aren'treally as intelligent as people like to think
because what are they gonna do?
They can't build cities with their flippers.
They're kinda trapped in their test tube bodies,and the same thing applies to whales.
Obviously they have very large brains, andthey're very social, and they can learn, but
whatever their intelligence is, it’s notlike our intelligence because we run around
tearing things apart and putting them backtogether and we’ve got the body for that.
So anyways, long before we were practicingscience, we were doing perfectly well, in
a sense, without any real knowledge of theobjective world at all - at least not any
scientific knowledge about the objective world.
So another thing you might observe about thatis that you can survive perfectly well without
knowing any science at all, in an articulatedand developed manner.
Of course animals are in that category.
So, that also, I think in some sense, underminesthe claim of science to anything approaching
a universal truth because obviously life canget along perfectly well without it.
Now it depends on some degree whether you’rea Darwinian or a Newtonian.
Perhaps the unwillingness to commence on whatpeople should do is one feature of modern
science than it is of science in general becauseI’m thinking someone like Clifford.
I don’t know if you know his essay on belief.
I don’t, no.
Oh okay, well his maxim is that basicallyit’s wrong always for anyone everywhere
to believe anything on his push to evidence.
And he sort of tries to prove it - he’sa mathematician.
He tries to prove it on a moral basis.
Of course, it’s not scientific.
That kind of claim can’t be scientific butYeah, well I mean obviously the people who
began the Scientific Revolution thought ofit as part of a moral movement.
I mean it was part of the enlightenment.
It was part of bringing clarity to our conceptualizationsof the world and that was supposed to be a
positive thing, but the only issue is thatclaim seems to be outside of the claim on
science, in some sense.
Anyways, you get the picture with regard tothe argument.
Okay, now the next step might be if you needor can utilize or there exists information
that is not strictly scientific, one mightbe, well, where did that information come
from?
That's a good one.
How is it transmitted?
That's another one.
And the worst of it is, of course, how mightit be verified?
Because one of the issues - one of the thingsthat scientists have really got down, and
it’s a major deal, is that they can layforth a theory of truth and they they can
operate within that theory of truth and prettymuch everyone can agree on what it is.
The more well established the science, themore that’s the case.
Like people don’t really doubt Einstein’s- people really don’t doubt quantum theory
anymore, and you guys don’t doubt it becausethere you are using your computers and you
wouldn’t be able to use your computers ifquantum theory wasn't right, so it’s certainly
right enough.
But enough more impressively than that, wheneversomeone’s tried to prove it wrong, in any
possible way, even in its most bizarre predictionsover the last hundred and some years, it’s
passed every test with flying colors.
So you know, you can make pretty damn solidtruth claims from within the scientific perspective,
but the problem is that it’s a lot harderto do that from within a moral perspective
and there's all sorts of reasons for that.
One reason might be that there's a certainamount of situational complexity related to
every moral question that you can't reduce.
For example, imagine if you're a clinicalpsychologist and you're listening to two people
who know each other very well, maybe husbandand wife, discuss their last argument.
And you might say - well you might think - welllet's get to the bottom of this.
Let's find out what this argument is about.
You might think, if you were scientificallyinclined, that it is in fact about something
which means that if you investigated longenough, you can actually figure out what the
facts are, but I actually don't believe that'strue.
And the reason I don’t think it’s trueis this.
Imagine you have a - there’s this old jokeabout these two friends.
They're like 85 years old and they're sittingon the park bench feeding the pigeons, and
one friend says to the other “64,” andthe other guy cracks up and laughs like mad
about that.
Then the other guy says “83,” then theother guy cracks up and laughs about that,
and some guy’s watching them and wonderingwhat in the world is going on.
So the person comes over to these old guysand says what’s the scoop here?
All you’re doing is sitting there sayingnumbers to each other and then you’re laughing
uproariously and I just don't get it.
And they said, well we’ve known each otherso long that we’ve heard each other’s
jokes at least a hundred times and so we havethem completely memorized, and so a couple
of years ago we decided we’d just numberthe damn things and it would take a lot less
time to tell then and we could laugh morethat way.
So, it’s an interesting little joke becauseit sheds some light on the nature of deep
relationships, and if you have a deep relationshipwith someone, here’s how you can think about
it.
Imagine you're trying to analyze an essay,and I’ve actually built an essay writing
module which is on my site - 230 website.
I don’t remember which template it is butI’ll tell you in a while.
It’s based on this theory of meaning, roughlyspeaking, and you should use it to write your
essay because if you do, it’ll be a waybetter essay.
Here’s the issue.
If you're reading an essay, where is the meaning?
Well, that’s a hard one because it mightbe a hard one.
So, the question might be badly formulatedin some sense because it might be many places.
But, let’s think it through logically.
Well you need the letters if it’s writtenin alphabetic script.
So obviously some of the meaning is in theletters, and then the letters are combined
in certain particular ways and that givesyou some words, and the words are combined
in some particular ways and that gives youphrases, and the phrases are joined together
in sentences, and the sentences are strungtogether in some reasonably coherent manner.
So they kind of go from start to end in aparagraph, and then the paragraphs are strung
together in a coherent manner to make up thetotality of the essay.
One of the things I noticed when I tried tofigure out how to grade essays and how to
assess them is that you could do a good ora bad job at any one of those levels.
Like a really bad essay is full of spellingmistakes, the words are inappropriate because
the person doesn't actually understand themso they're awkwardly used, the phrases are
put together in a cliched manner, the sentencestructure isn't good.
The sentences aren't even in the right paragraphs,much less organized properly.
The paragraphs don't flow from one to anotherin what might be called - that’s kind of
where the skeleton of the story is.
It’s sort of the most important level insome sense, and even if that wasn't all wrong
there’s actually no idea there anyways.
And then you can also read essays that haveone or more of those flaws or some combination
of all of them.
So very frequently, I’d read a student’sessays and this often happens with smart,
creative students who are very badly educated,and that would be probably fifty percent of
the people in this class, I would bet.
I say that for genuine reasons because I runa fourth year seminar where I have people
write extensively, so what they do is theywrite a four page essay, and then I complain
about it at all those levels of analysis,and then they write the same essay again in
six pages, and then I do the same thing, andthen I do the same thing and then they do
the same thing in eight pages, and half ofthe first essays are terrible.
That's partly because students do triage.
They think, well do I really have to workin this course?
I’ll try a bit and if I get slapped, I’llwork a little harder, and if I don’t, I’ll
devote my time to other courses which is aperfectly reasonable thing to do, but some
of it is just pure inability.
But what is really fascinating is by the endof the course is that all of the students
are writing well, and it’s pathetic as faras I’m concerned because it meant that everybody
could have been taught to write ten yearsago but they weren't.
Anyways if you look at this template thatI laid out, then it will help you in this
because it walks you through the process ofwriting properly.
So now and then I would read an essay andeverything is wrong about it, but there's
a really smart about it, and knowing thismultilevel idea with regards to meaning, I
can say, look you’re smarter than you canwrite.
There's really something here, but here'sall the things that are wrong with it.
Then you get a worse situation in some sensewhere everything about the essay is good but
the idea isn’t, and so the words are good,the phrases.
The sentences are right, and it goes togetherbut it adds up to nothing.
And those are hard to grade because you givethem a C maybe or a B, cause I’d probably
give them a B, and the person comes up andsays, where did I make a mistake?
It’s like, well you didn't really make amistake, you just didn't do anything right,
and that's a whole different problem.
So you think, that’s pretty complex withregards to an essay.
Where’s the meaning?
But that isn't where the meaning is.
Here, let me give you an example.
I was thinking of this the other day.
So, the ethnicity and the cultural backgroundsof my students have changed quite radically
over the years.
When I started teaching this course for example- and my personality course as well which
would have been thirty years ago - I can takeit for granted that everyone in the room would
know the basic biblical stories, and theywould know the Judeo-Christian version of
them and not, say the Islamic version of them.
Well that's gone, and that's really made itdifficult for me in some ways because there's
a bunch of things.
There’s a bunch of collective knowledgethat might constitute a shared set of cultural
assumptions that I can no longer presume andit means there's all sorts of things that
I can't talk about or if I’m going to talkabout, I have to step way back and start from
first principles let’s say.
So that’s also made me think because ifI - let’s say you write me an essay and
let’s say it’s a Psychology essay.
Now you're gonna presume that there's a wholebunch of things I know about Psychology that
you also know.
And the reason you're going to presume thatis because, well we come - for the purpose
of this conversation - we come from the samecultural background and what that means is
we share a set of assumptions, and we don'thave to say what those assumptions are.
We can assume them and then we can talk aboutthe things that we disagree about, and of
course that's what you're doing when you'rewriting an essay or having a conversation
right?
You're saying well obviously we don't haveto talk about what we know because we already
know it.
We want to push that a little bit so we startto talk a little bit about the things we don’t
know, but no more so than we both understand.
So then you think damn it, the meaning ofthe essay isn’t in the essay at all.
It’s in the interaction between the sharedcultural assumptions between the writer and
the reader and the essay.
Well and then you think, it’s worse thanthat even because the shared cultural assumptions
are in their own sort of network, and thenthat's nested inside a very an extraordinarily
broad biological network and it’s like actually,you can continue expanding the outer reaches
of the essay without limit.
So part of that means it’s actually impossibleto specify the meaning of the essay.
It’s something you both work at in combination,as writer and as reader, but it’s very fluid
and flexible.
That problem is partly why the post modernistsgot going because they sort of noticed this.
Corrupt as they are, they did notice at onepoint that it was very very difficult to say
what any given phrase, paragraph, or essaymean because it wasn't there - like it’s
not in the book.
It’s sort of in the book, but - you knowthis too if you listen to a piece of music.
So let’s say you had a favorite song whenyou were fourteen, and when you first heard
that song, maybe you didn’t like it thatmuch, but you maybe heard it four times and
thought man that’s one excellent song.
Then at some point, you've heard it so manytimes that you never want to hear it again.
That’s interesting too because it meansthe song has transformed in relationship to
your historical interactions with it and youmight say, no this song is the same.
Well, it depends on what you mean by the song.
The notes are the same.
The experience has certainly transformed.
So anyways, back to the couple that are sittingthere talking.
They're having this argument and they're tryingto sort out what this is about.
Well the problem is it’s about everythingthe argument is about plus everything that’s
ever happened to them in their relationship.
If someone has told you the same thing fiftytimes, it is not the same thing as the thing
they told you the first time.
God only knows how many transformations it’sgone through as it’s been continually repeated,
and how many different arguments it’s beenembedded in, and how many things you’d have
to know to understand the shades of intonationin all of that.
But basically each utterance a couple producesis - it’s meaning is determined by the entire
history of interactions that those two peoplehave had.
So, how are you going to specify that?
It’s very very difficult to specify it.
Now, you really can’t, and it’s also difficultto know when you’ve specified it enough.
You know, one of the things that is interestingtraining as a psychoanalyst is that it started
to become absolutely mind boggling how mucharchaeology you can undertake underneath a
single statement, especially if it’s deliveredwith a bit of edge and some contempt.
It’s like there’s just levels and levelsand levels and levels of meaning underneath
that, and you can tell that when you’reengaged in an argument like that because someone
will trigger you, let’s say, for lack ofa better word, and they’ll have broken a
rule that you have established with them andyou’re both in a pit.
The fight is about that pit, even though maybeit’s about some surface thing, and you're
just running around there like rats that arelit on fire and there’s nothing you can
do about it.
And it’s a consequence of all the issuesthat are lurking beneath the surface of that
speech act that seemed to be something - youcould capture it on a video.
You can say, well here’s what you said.
There's a video tape recording of it.
It’s like no, that's not what you said becausethe videotape cannot capture the context,
and it can’t.
So you can't even get an objective recordof the meaning of the conversation because
the meaning isn’t right in the conversation.
Okay so that’s one of the problems.
One of the problems we’re trying to validatemoral claims is that you’ve got this insane
contextual complexity that’s almost impossibleto dispose of, and so you can say - you can
even say that if person A did action A insituation A, that’d be right and then person
B did action A in situation A, that wouldbe wrong.
It would depend on the person, and so it’svery easy to slip from that into a kind of
moral relativism because how in the worlddo you deal with the complexity and how do
you make a truth claim?
So I would really say in some sense that’sthe intellectual situation in modern universities.
Now, the other thing that’s kind of interestingis that this was actually discovered in a
number of modern fields simultaneously, sojust as the literary theorists started to
discover, say after World War II, that itwasn’t enough to say that a book had meaning
in it.
Like there was something wrong with that,and there isn't even a single meaning, there’s
a multiplicity of meanings and it isn't evena stable multiplicity of meanings, people
were finding that out in other domains aswell.
For example in artificial intelligence whereit became very obvious, very rapidly that
perceiving a simple object was not simplebecause objects aren’t simple, and the border
between one object and another is in somesense arbitrary.
I mean, when I look at each of you, I sortof see you as entities, but that’s because
I see you at this level of resolution.
You're cellular masses at a different levelof resolution.
You're molecular composites at a differentlevel of resolution.
You’re made up of ten times as many bacteriaas cells at another level of resolution, so
really you’re more like an ocean than youare like an entity.
And then, well is it you or your family that’sthe real.
Or is it you, your family, and your culture?
What about your species, or are you a mammal.
It’s like all of those things and any ofthose things at the same time, so when I look
at you, what am I supposed to see?
Do I see individual with name or do I seeethnicity or do I see - well you get the picture.
So object perception turns out to be extraordinarilydifficult because things aren't just simple
objects even if they’re relatively simple.
So, you throw your hands.
You think how can there be any harmony.
How can you draw some sort of sense from that?
Okay, so that’s the argument against drawingany sense out of it.
But then, let’s try the other attack.
Let’s see if we can make a case for therebeing some claims of - that moral claims can
be validated.
Okay, so here’s a question for you.
If you took a bunch of chimpanzees that didn'tknow each other and you threw them in this
classroom, what you would have is a war.
Right.
Now, you're roughly in that situation, notexactly because A - you’re not chimpanzees,
but you know your genetic material is quitereasonably related.
You only split off your common ancestors sevenmillion years ago, and that seems like a long
time and it is, but it’s not three hundredmillion years ago.
It’s still relatively recently from theevolutionary perspective.
Here you all are, you don’t really knoweach other.
You obviously share important elements ofidentity.
So you’re all students, and you can comein here and all of a sudden you all know what
to do, and no one fights.
Or if they do fight, it’s - there are veryconstrained rules around the fighting and
everyone accepts them, and it seems hard tosay that’s not better than the alternative.
So unless you wanna come in here and havean absolute chaotic war.
Somehow we’ve managed to figure out howwe can figure out how to bring relative strangers
together in a relatively high pressure situationbecause we’re learning about complicated
and challenging things, and everybody getsalong.
And everybody’s kind of happy about that.
So it looks like we can figure out patternsof behavior that, well, then the question
is, are they correct?
Are they morally correct?
Are they right, or did they work?
And you might also ask yourself what’s thedifference between all of those claims, is
there similarity or difference between thoseclaims.
So, and then you might ask yourself - okayso here’s something else you might think
about.
So, let’s say you’re playing Monopoly.
How many of you have played Monopoly in yourlife?
Okay, is there anyone here who hasn't playedMonopoly?
Excellent.
A cultural universal.
So, obviously in some ways it doesn't matterif you get all those little hotels right?
But, on the other hand if you act like itdoesn't matter while you're playing Monopoly,
then people hit you with things and they shouldbecause part of the rule is that you're gonna
act like this matters because if you don't,then it’s not any fun.
So you have to act like it matters and thenit turns out when you start playing, it matters.
People will actually - they’ll get angry,especially if you cheat.
But people will play Monopoly.
They’ll act as if the endpoint matters.
You might say, well what is the endpoint?
And one answer is to get all the hotels andall the money, so you enter the 1%, so you
have all the wealth and no one has any, andso you win and you feel happy about that,
even if you're a radical left winger.
So that's kind of interesting.
Then you say, well that's not really the point.
The point is to enjoy the game, and you sayyeah okay that’s probably the point too.
And you might say, well that's not reallythe point either.
You want to hone your negotiating skills.
You want to spend some time with your friends.
There's lots of things going on at once, butit doesn't really matter because Monopoly
is a game that you’ll play.
Now imagine instead that Monopoly - here'sthe new rule for Monopoly.
All the people you're playing with can randomlysteal your hotels and houses and your money
whenever they want, and you can steal it back.
So then you think, well no one’s gonna playthat game, and then you think well why not?
Well, the first surface answer is that’sa stupid game, and you know that somehow.
You think that’s a stupid game, but thenyou start to think about well why is that
a stupid game?
Or you might say it’s an unplayable gamewhich would be a little bit more sophisticated.
Why would that not work?
And you might say, well what’s the pointin getting all the hotels if someone could
just take them?
But you might say what’s the point in gettingthe hotels anyway?
Like who cares about the damn hotels.
So it’s a bit tricky.
There’s something about the randomness ofwhat’s now allowed and the unpredictability
of it and the arbitrary nature of it and itslack of a relationship with your own actions
that takes all the motivational impetus outof the game.
So one thing we might think about to beginwith, is there’s a difference between a
good game and a bad game, and there's alsoa difference between a game and no game.
And we don’t know what the difference isexactly, but there is a difference.
We might even say not only are there goodgames and bad games, some good games are better
than other games.
How many of you have played Settlers of Catan?
Okay, is that better than Monopoly or worse?
Student says: It’s better.
better.
Does anyone think it’s not better?
Okay, why is it better?
What’s better about it?
It’s more complex and the part where yousaid - I mean it’s not necessarily stealing
but there’s a piece of the game in there,I think it’s like the robber or something
like that.
Yeah, there’s a robber.
Student says: And you place him on one ofthe tiles.
You can mess with people, so that’s fun.
It is fun.
It’s like I’m gonna get you with a robber.
It’s more akin to real like I think, likein Monopoly
No, that’s reasonable.
It’s also got a strategic element.
How many of you play Risk?
Okay, Settlers of Catan or Risk?
Okay, two Risk diehards.
What about the rest of you?
How many are for Risk?
Two.
How many for Settlers of Catan.
Okay, okay.
Well, Settlers of Catan is a bit like Riskbecause it has a strategic element and there's
a territorial expansion that goes along withit, and there’s also trading which is one
of the things that's nice about Monopoly andabout Risk.
Okay but well, you can see - you have intuitionsabout what constitutes a better game and part
of the way you develop those intuitions isnot exactly philosophical because I doubt
if you really thought through why Settlersof Catan is a better game than, say, Risk
or Monopoly for those of that think it does,but you watch your own reaction and your own
reaction is okay well I’d rather play Settlersof Catan.
You might ask yourself why, but you don’thave to.
You’d just rather play it.
So then you think well what does it mean thatyou’d rather play it?
Well it’s more fun, it’s more enjoyable.
If asked voluntarily, that's the one I wouldpick, but you really don't know why, apart
from those reasons but obviously those arecomplex - that’s a complex social engagement,
those games.
They’re complex.
In fact they’re so complex, you can havepreferences and not even know why, and that’s
interesting.
I think the idea that there are games, goodgames and bad games and games and non-games,
is a nice way of starting to conceptualizewhat the difference might be between moral
systems because a game is actually a moralsystem.
It has a point.
It has an end.
You have to cooperate and compete to run throughthe game.
So awhile back, a psychologist actually startedthis and it’s reprehensible, but psychologists
have done lots of reprehensible things andthis is one of them.
This psychologist, whose name I don't rememberat the moment, was reviewing the literature
on the difference in aggression between boysand girls and men and women.
Boys and men are much more aggressive, dependingon how you define as aggressive, than girls
and women.
Now that tends to be mostly true with physicalaggression.
So you might say kicking, hitting, biting,punching, stealing.
Two year old boys for example - two year olds,the ones who do most of that are boys.
Now, the two year old girls are cutting eachother up behind their backs but no one measures
that.
So you find for example, with female aggressionit tends to be relationship savaging, and
you see that in the playground.
You see it in junior high.
You see it in high school, and you see iton the net.
It’s always the same thing.
Whether men are more aggressive than women,it depends on how you define aggression, but
men are more physically aggressive anyways.
Awhile back, there was this idea that maybewe could dampen down the male aggression by
socializing little boys more like little girls,and one of the offshoots of that was that
we should only let children play cooperativegames.
Now, the first thing you might notice is thatanything you might have done as a game was
not cooperative.
Right, like it’s not a game if it’s justcooperative, but then the other thing you
might notice is that the distinction betweena cooperative and a competitive game is far
more sophisticated than people that come upwith those dimwitted theories of how to improve
the world would ever appreciate.
So here’s an example.
Is hockey a game?
Yes.
Is it an aggressive game?
Yes.
Is it a competitive game?
Yes.
Is it a cooperative game?
Yes.
Aha.
Why?
Why is it a cooperative game?
Because you have to work together.
Right, so there's the team right.
You’re also obviously cooperating with yourteam members, but you're also maybe trying
to be the best player, but you're also tryingto be the best player in a way that doesn't
irritate the hell out of your team playersright, because there's something about that
that’s counter productive.
Like, even if you're a good player and you’rea prima donna and you hog the puck, say, and
maybe you're not interested in the developmentof your other team members, like you’re
not a good player even if you are the mosttalented.
So, there’s obviously a cooperative element.
Is there a cooperative element beyond that?
Well yeah, you have to all agree to sort ofcooperate in so much as agreeing to the rules
of the game and playing it.
Right.
You don't bring a chessboard or a basketball.
Right.
No matter if you're on different teams becauseyou're all there to play hockey.
So just to play hockey is a cooperative endeavorbecause think of all the other things you
could be doing instead of playing hockey atthat time.
You could be doing an infinite number of otherthings so really if you look at the relationship
between cooperation and competition in anycollaborative human affair, things are usually
competitive at one level, cooperative at another,competitive at another, like there’s this
continual interplay between competition andcooperation and you can't disentangle them.
Now one of the things that Piaget said - Piagetis a, for those of you who don’t know and
you probably all do know, is perhaps the foremostdevelopmental psychologist of the 20th century
even though he didn't think he was a psychologist.
Piaget actually made the claim, the radicalclaim, that two year olds for example - this
isn’t Piaget’s claim but it’s associated.
If you put people together, and their agematched.
So you got a group of nine months olds, say,one year olds, two year olds, three year olds,
all the way up to eighteen, and you just throwthem in a room, maybe with some things of
them to do and you count the number of violentacts, which is kicking, hitting, biting, or
stealing.
Okay, two year olds, they’re the most violenthuman beings and most of them aren't actually
violent.
There's a subset of them that are violent.
It’s about five to ten percent of them,and almost all of them are boys, and then
if you track those boys across time, overthe next two years most of them become civilized
and the ones that don't never become civilized.
So they're kind of antisocial throughout theirchildhood, and then when testosterone kicks
in at about fourteen and all the boys getantisocial again, they catch up to the always
antisocial boys and the normal boys taperoff quite dramatically at around nineteen
and flatten right out at about twenty sevenbut the antisocial boys, they just keep being
antisocial.
So now, Piaget noted that there was a dramatictransformation in behavior - individual behavior
- in relationship to the social world betweenthe ages of two and four.
And, if you watch two year olds play together,what they did fundamentally is like a parallel
play.
So maybe, there's one two year old there andanother two year old there and that two year
old is playing truck and this two year oldis playing ambulance or something or maybe
playing doll, and they're sitting with eachother, and maybe they interact a little bit
but they're not playing the same game.
Okay so, what they're doing in some senseis they're engaged in a goal directed activity,
and it has a point.
They're sort of integrating all their interiorsub personalities in a sense that allows them
to play a single game with themselves.
That's pretty complex from a cognitive perspectivebecause they're not fractionated, and they're
not being pulled out by hunger or anger orsadness or fear or any of those things, and
they're doing something that's highly complexcognitively and they can organize themselves
well enough to do it for a substantial periodof time.
So it’s like it’s a major developmentaladvance.
But they can't do it with another person.
Now one of Piaget’s hypotheses was thatthey couldn't do it - they couldn't play the
same game with another person without actuallysetting up a competitive structure so actually
competition was a prerequisite to competition.
The idea was okay so, if you watch how kidsdo this, you can get a sense of it.
I mean, on the one hand they all get togetherand they decide how to play tag.
Everyone knows the rules for tag, and youcan win at tag, but without the point - the
point in some sense is the construction ofa dominance hierarchy of competence.
Someone wins and then there are sort of thepeople who are second best and third best,
and everybody's really into doing that.
You all have to get together if you're kidsand you say well what should we do.
You decide, well, we’re gonna play tag andthen you set up the rules because there’s
infinite variations of tag, and everyone goesoff and play.
So it’s a competitive game because onlyone person can win, or maybe one at a time
can win.
But once you’ve all agreed on that, thenyou’re cooperating.
So that’s quite interesting, and Piagetregarded that as a necessary stage of the
ability to act like a social creature.
Here’s something that happens if you’renot a very popular kid.
Let’s say four kids are playing Jacks.
Good enough.
I don't think kids play Jacks anymore butwhatever.
If they were playing Jacks, they’re sittingsthere playing Jacks, and when you play Jacks,
you bounce a ball and you pick up a jack,and if you manage that and a ball - if you
manage that, you drop the ball and pick uptwo jacks and drop the ball, and you keep
going up till like eight jacks or whatever.
So now another kid wants to play Jacks, andwe’ll say this is a relatively popular kid
and so the kid sidles up to the group that’splaying and sits down because they're all
sitting down and then watches, and then maybewatches jack-playing motions or a couple of
comments about how the Jacks game is going,and maybe the other kids don't have to disrupt
what they're doing very much and they cankind of open the circle, and let that kid
scoot in and he gets to, or she gets to playJacks too.
Whereas a kid that doesn't - and that oftendoesn't happen, even if it’s a popular kid.
Sometimes the little group that's alreadyformed won’t open and let them in.
You've been to cocktail parties.
It’s exactly the same thing.
It’s exactly the same thing.
So you’re supposed to hang around the edgeof the conversation and maybe if you've got
something that isn't too stupid to say, youcan offer it and maybe they’d let you in.
Okay, now if you're maybe not very social,what you do is stand out there and you don't
notice what the hell is going on and you don'tstart to match your body to what’s happening,
and maybe you say, I don't want to play Jacks,that's a stupid game.
Let's go do something else, in which casethe kids are not happy with you, and you're
unpopular.
And that’s that.
You're stuck with it because if you've gotthat by the time you’re four, the other
kids are gonna leave you so far in the dustyou’re never going to catch up.
Okay, so what have we concluded from that?
We might conclude that people play games.
There's lots of different games.
There’s lots of different playable games.
There might even be an infinite number ofplayable games.
There's a lot of non playable games, thoseare the ones that aren’t any fun, and there's
a lot of interactions that aren’t games.
Okay so we can all accept that, and then we’veadded to that the observation, or the presupposition,
the ability to play games is a prerequisitefor being socialized, so being able to operate
together with people and that that operationhas elements of competition and elements of
cooperation.
Reasonable?
And then you might say, well everything peopledo communally has a game like aspect, and
you might say well that's actually why kidslike to play games because kids play games
because games are a simplified analog of life,and if you get good at playing games - well
what happens is that the games you play areincreasingly complex and more and more real
world like until they're actually indistinguishablefrom acting in the world.
But they're even then they're still gamesin a sense because they could - the rules
could be different.
But then, you might think well are there thingsthat couldn’t be different?
Well, yeah there are some things.
It’s gonna be cooperative.
It’s gonna be competitive.
There's gonna be rules.
Everybody needs to agree on the rules.
People have to want to play.
This is something else Piaget observed.
It’s bloody brilliant.
He thought well, how can you decide if onegame is better than another.
Let’s say that's a moral claim in a sense,but he wanted to narrow it down so that it
was possible it could be answered.
What he said was imagine you have group Athat was attempting to obtain a goal, and
group B that are attempting to attain a goal.
Both groups have agreed that attaining thegoal is valuable.
We don’t have to argue about the value ofthe goal.
We’ve settled that.
Okay now, we’re going to make a furtherassumption which is all things considered,
getting towards the goal with less effort,more enjoyment, and less trouble would be
better.
Okay, you have to take that as a given becauseit might not be.
Sometimes something difficult is better.
Well then you might say okay, would peopleworking voluntarily or involuntarily be more
likely be able to reach that goal with lessmisery faster and more effectively.
Piaget’s answer was if you could get peopleto play the game voluntarily, you don't have
to waste effort on enforcement, no one kicksback so the system is going to be more efficient
across time.
Now that’s smart because he’s got a wayof conceptualizing what might constitute a
better system.
Now it’s grounded in subjective experiencein some degree.
Less misery, more enjoyment, but there's alsoa way of measuring it.
It’s also more efficient, or it does whatit’s supposed to do with less noise and
grief.
Less cost, let’s say.
So that’s pretty smart.
Okay, so then let’s make another - wellhow old do you think kids games are?
And I don’t know what’s happened to kidsin recent years because their culture has
somewhat been seriously disrupted by televisionand computer, but you guys are a lot younger
than me.
Did you play hide and go seek?
You know ring around the rosie?
You know that.
Do you know what that is?
You don’t know Ring Around the Rosie.
How many people don’t know that.
Ring around the rosie, pockets full of posies,hush ah hush ah, we all fall down?
Okay, how many know that.
It’s an English nursery rhyme.
It’s about the plague.
It’s about the black plague by the way.
And so, that piece of doggerel, that pieceof rhyme has been around, transmitted by the
oral culture of children since the time ofthe black plague.
And so a lot of children’s tradition isin the oral tradition, and a lot of the games
children play are passed along by children.
Kids learn how to play hide and go seek.
And how many of you played tag?
Anyone never play tag?
Right, so everyone plays tag.
How would you conceptualize tag if you werea biologist?
What do you think children are doing?
They’re hunting.
They're chasing things down, obviously.
They're chasing things down.
Now hide and go seek, that’s a tougher one,but it’s certainly exploration.
They’re exploring the landscape, and they'rematching wits with one another, but - and
they're also trying to see if - you know,do people like you enough to actually find
you, which is a helpful thing to know if you'refour years old.
So anyways, children pass these games downacross the centuries.
Maybe tag is one of those games you don'teven have to pass down.
Children might just invent it spontaneouslywith every generation because you can more
or less play tag with a dog.
I mean, the dog doesn't quite get it, butit’s close.
Okay, so there are some games that are enjoyableenough that they're either transmitted and
everyone knows them very rapidly, or they'reso close to our nature we can just reinvent
them and I think tag is the classic exampleof that.
So that’s interesting too because what itmeans is that there’s certain types of competitive
and cooperative behavior.
Those are elementary moral systems that are- they look like they're integral to our nature.
You can even say they're built right in, oryou might say they're so close to built in
that it doesn't take much of an introductionfor the roles of the game before everybody’s
pretty happy with it.
You see this with a lot of things.
You play peek-a-boo with a baby.
Okay so what are the rules?
What are the rules of peek-a-boo.
You cover your eyes.
You cover your eyes.
Okay so that’s right.
You go like this.
Okay then what’s the next rule?
That’s right.
You reveal your eyes.
You don't just sit there like this.
Now you can play a trick on a baby if youwant, and babies will laugh about this sort
of thing which is really, I think, quite amazing.
A baby’s laugh is something remarkable tome.
So you can go like this, and then like thisand then like this and then like this and
then you can do this, and the baby will laughbecause that's a little variation eh.
Or you can go like this.
Right.
And then the baby - well that’ll even makeyou guys laugh.
That’s good, you can see how deeply rootedthis is.
So you know but, eventually what’ll thebaby do?
It’ll grab your hands, pull them down becauseyou're breaking the damn rules.
And the baby knows the rules even though you’venever established any rules, and you can get
the rules going with about five reps.
You say okay, this.
Maybe no one’s ever played peek-a-boo witha baby.
The baby figures it out right away.
This, this, and then you vary that.
Maybe do that.
That baby thinks that’s a hell of a goodjoke, you know, cause you went up instead
of down, and so it’s variations within thisrule bound theme.
It’s kind of musical in a sense, there’svariations in the theme.
Now what you don’t do is go.
Waahh!
Cause that’ll just short it right out.
So you don't do that unless you’re, youknow, unless you have an evil streak in you.
So there's certainly ways of violating thebaby’s expectations and what the baby will
do if you do that is startle and they startlewith their whole bodies, and then look at
you and probably they’ll burst into tears.
But some babies will just laugh like mad ifsomething like that happens, and you can find
those babies all over YouTube, right, becauseyou get the baby that the mother sneezes and
the baby has a fit laughing for like ten minutes.
But it’s quite interesting.
One of the things about babies that I’venever been able to understand is the staggering
sophistication of their senses of humor.
Like it’s deep eh?
Cause even a nine month old baby can playtricks on you.
So, you know they're baby tricks, but still,they’re tricks and they laugh and they're
quite comical and they like variation.
Anyways, the point is - one of the pointsof all this is this understanding of game
like structure is really really really reallyreally really deep inside of us, and it’s
way before articulation.
It’s way before we can say the rules.
Babies can pick up the damn rules right awayand it’s kind of a dance in some sense,
and a dance is also a rule bound structure.
If you’re dancing with someone well, there’srules, but don't step on their feet but you
also set up a set of expectations in the danceand you violate them in tandem.
And if you can do it gracefully, it’s fun.
Maybe the person you’re dancing with isan absolute klutz and so autistic you can’t
even get outside of yourself, and might makea half reasonable partner or if it’s just
hopeless.
But the dance is the same thing.
It’s not negotiated verbally.
It’s negotiated bodily, and unless we’reable to imitate, and imitate insanely well
because human beings can imitate like mad,because we won’t be able to do that.
So babies are the same way.
You basically start - you don’t actually.
Peek-a-boo doesn’t have rules because arule is a stated description of a set of expectations.
What peek-a-boo has is expectations and repetition,and you can violate the expectation but that
doesn’t mean you’re violating a rule becausean expectation is not a rule until you observe
the expectation, you describe what it is andmaybe even write it down.
You can play games long before you can followrules, and one of the things Piaget observed
is if you watched kids play a complicatedgame like marbles and they're like six, and
you take them out of the game and ask themwhat the rules are, they can't tell you or
they might get some of them right and a bunchof them wrong.
Maybe if you interviewed every child thatwas playing, and you looked at the commonality
of the descriptions, you could extract outthe underlying rule structure of the game.
But the kids don't know the rules.
What they know is how to play with other kidswhen they're playing marbles, and a lot of
that’s nonverbal hints and eyebrow raisesand no you can’t do that and so forth.
It isn't much later until they can tell youthe rules, if ever.
So like, you know, you guys can't tell methe rules for dancing successfully with someone.
You can tell me some stupid things you shouldn’tdo, but imagine how complex it is.
It’s very difficult to articulate out thewhole structure, but you can sure tell when
it’s happening, and you can sure tell whenyou’re not doing it or when your partner
isn’t.
So partly what that also means is you knowhow to do things you don't know how to do,
and you know how to all sorts of things youdon't know how you know how to do.
In fact, most of what you know is like that.
That also means we can be playing games thatare extraordinarily sophisticated that we
don’t understand, but that doesn't mean- well we can't describe at least.
We don't have an articulated knowledge ofthe structure, but we can still play them.
Now, I don't know if you know this or not.
You might know it.
A while back, twenty years ago - about that.
Those massive online multiplayer games startedto become popular, and some of them - I think,
although I don't know this for sure - someof them lasted a long time, and maybe some
of them still being played, like the earlyones.
So they developed entire worlds in there andyou know, there was an economist who became
quite famous because of those games.
Castronova, I think his name was.
Edward Castronova.
I think that’s right, but it’s close.
Anyways, he thought hey look man those aren’tgames, those are countries.
So one of the things he tried to do was calculatetheir gross national product, and you know,
you can trade items in those little worldsand you could sell them on eBay.
For awhile in this one game, and maybe thisstill happens, there were young people in
the Philippines who were working inside thesegames making artifacts that they were selling
on eBay to other game players because theycould make more money doing that than actually
working in the actual world.
So Castronova - I think was his name - saidwell you don't get it.
That is the real world.
It’s not a game, or if it’s a game it’sso much like the world that it’s part of
the world.
So he calculated the gross national productof some of these massive games, and they were
like the 30th richest country in the world.
It was insane.
So that’s interesting because that alsoshows you that the line between a game and
reality is not clear.
Here’s another example of that.
Something worth thinking about.
Some of you have no doubt played very complexmultiplayer online games, and I suppose those
are often adventure games or quest games andyou have to communicate with other people
and you have to solve problems and maybe youhave to defend yourselves, like you're in
an exploratory party in a new world.
Something like that.
So it’s pretty sophisticated, and okay someof you have worked at McDonald’s or another
fast food restaurant.
How many of you have worked at a restaurant.
How many at a fast food restaurant.
Would you say that an online game is morelike the world, or less like the world than
your job at a fast food restaurant.
More.
It’s more.
Anybody disagree?
Okay, why is it more like the real world?
Because you’re doing more complex stuff.
What are you doing?
You’re exploring.
You’re thinking.
You’re getting out of situations becausenew ones are always coming up and you're dealing
with them and you’re learning.
Fast food is like you're doing - Right, you’rea real cog in a fast food machine.
Yeah, but it’s in the real world.
Is it a game?
You’re more like a machine in the fast foodpart.
So does that mean McDonald’s is less realthan a multiplayer online game?
Well it’s a tough one, eh, because whenyou’re trying to think about what real means,
is you might think maybe I phrased that wrongly.
Maybe I could say is McDonald’s a worsemodel of the real world than a multiplayer
online game?
And it’s hard because it’s hard to sayMcDonald’s isn’t part of the real world
so a priori, the claim is kind of absurd.
It’s like well, you’re in a building.
People actually come there.
They give you money.
It’s real.
But then, well you think about these complexgames and you’re practicing an extraordinarily
sophisticated form of social and intellectualbehavior and we actually don’t know what
that does to people.
Maybe it makes them extraordinarily sophisticatedand social.
I do think it helps with introverts quitea lot because it’s harder for introverts
to become extremely socially fluid becausepeople wear them out.
A lot of introverts do a lot of heavy dutysocializing on the net, and in my experience
it’s been, all things considered, probablya plus rather than a minus.
With regards to your use of computationaldevices, one of the things I used to see my
kids doing is they would sit together in agroup.
They were teenagers, and there’d be a bunchof friends that weren't there and while they
were interacting with all their friends whowere there, they were also interacting with
all their friends who weren’t there.
Is that a common thing for teenagers to do?
You’re texting your friends and so forth.
Is that reasonably standard behavior?
How many of you have done that?
Okay how many of you have done that regularly?
Okay, how many of you haven’t done that?
Okay, so most people have done it but noteveryone.
For those of you have done it, is that moreadvanced or less advanced social behavior?
More.
Okay you think more.
Why?
Cause you’re keeping your friends in theroom while they’re not there.
So it’s like they have a conceptual ideaof what you’re doing and it’s like - they
understand where the group dynamics are movingtowards without them actually having be there.
Okay, do you think that you paid a price forit in the decrease of the interactions you
were having with the people that were actuallythere?
Not really.Yes.
You think so.
Okay, how many people think they do pay aprice for it?
How many people think they didn’t?
Okay, so - well let’s start with you guysthen.
Why did you think you didn't pay a price forit?
Well because I feel like it really doesn'ttake that much time to just text and go back
to talk to your friends.
Okay.
Well I think that you can pay a price, butif you’re doing it correctly and you’re
monitoring the conversation you're takinga part of, you can see when it would be appropriate
to text someone else which probably meansyou're paying more attention to the people
you're talking with because you're also texting.
Okay so you’re kind of taking a multitaskingrationale for it in some sense, although assuming
you have to also heighten your attention tomanage that.
There’s people who didn't think - that youdid pay a price for it.
Who thought that?
Okay, what sort of price?
I think that especially when you're textingpeople, there's so much complexity that gets
lost in translation, like you don't reallyconvey your feelings, like there's so much
more to use than language.
Okay then they certainly lose something.
What about you, while you're interacting withyour actual present friends?
I would say you have to commit some certainamount of effort to writing a text, you ignore
aspects of - for example, they’re askingabout something and then you go and text the
person and you come back and miss some partof the conversation.
Yeah, so it’s like kind of -Yeah so it’s kind of like start, stop, start,
stop.
I don't think you can one hundred percentcommit yourself to -
Well one of the things you suggested was thatsome of that can be mitigated by doing it
properly, which implies there's an emergentnorm for doing this sort of thing and that
if you're good at complying with the norm,then you’re not irritating people and maybe
you can handle both things at once.
Something like that.
But if it’s properly to the people who arethere, is it proper for the friend who is
waiting for you to answer?
Well I guess one answer to that is that’sup to them to determine, like if they don't
want to be part of it, they can do somethingelse.
The reason I’m saying that specificallyis that you can imagine that’s how the norm
develops.
It’s like obviously if a successful normis going to develop that allows text conversation
and real world conversation to occur at thesame time, everybody has to want it to happen.
That means if you can’t do it in the mannerthat everyone wants, it’s going to die out.
Now see, that's another example of how youcan see how moral structures - I think - might
evolve, is the right way of thinking aboutit because I think moral structures evolve.
And I think they’re just as real as anythingelse that evolves.
Now, evolved things can be staggeringly complex.
Just think about how many lifeforms thereare, and how many niches there are for their
lifeforms and so you have in some sense aninfinite variety, but it’s not infinite,
and it follows patterns.
Not just any old thing can be alive, and notjust any old thing can be social.
Here’s an example, and I found this outawhile back.
I did a lot of neurobiological research.
Some of it hands on, a lot of it conceptualespecially in the early days of my graduate
work.
I got really interested in the function ofserotonin.
You all know, undoubtedly, that one of thethings antidepressants do is decrease the
rate at which serotonin is pulled back upinto the neurons that deliver it and that
seems to help stabilize people’s negativeemotions.
Makes them less volatile, less anxious, lesslikely to withdraw, and so - or you could
say it makes them more confident.
Now we also know if you say we look at a chimphierarchy, you take bottom chimp and you give
him anti-depressants, he looks a lot morelike top chimp.
So, because the bottom chimp world is a verydangerous place.
It’s very uncertain.
He doesn't have a place to sleep.
He doesn't have high quality mates.
He doesn't have good things to eat.
He’s stressed man, it’s bad down there.
So maybe that's part of the reason his nervoussystem is tuned so that he’s more anxious
and upset by everything because everythingis more dangerous.
Part of that’s modulated by serotonin.
Okay, so here’s a rough rule.
If there’s a hierarchy in an animal kingdom,as you move up the hierarchy, your serotonin
levels increase and as you move down the hierarchy,your serotonin levels decrease and that’s
somewhat independent of your absolute wealth.
So here’s a famous experiment.
It’s called the White Hall experiment andit was done on English bureaucrats, and the
thing that’s so cool about the White Hallexperiments is they were done fifty years
apart.
So what they showed basically was - imagineyou take an English bureaucracy and you stratify
it by position.
Englishmen are hierarchical, and so you stratifyit by position.
You have the top people and the bottom peopleand what you find is the bottom people die
faster and more often.
You might say if you're not that healthy,you end up at the bottom.
Fair enough, but there seems to be an effectabove the effect of just general health.
It’s worse to be at the bottom than at thetop.
Okay, that was true 70 years ago, and anotherstudy was done 50 years after that.
Now the thing that’s so cool is by thattime, from a material perspective, the people
at the bottom of the modern hierarchy wereat least as wealthy as the people who were
like two thirds of the way up 50 years beforebecause everybody had running water, everyone
had enough heat for the winter, you know.
Everyone had shelter, and so on.
So you figure, with regards to wealth, onceyou’ve got running water, reliable shelter,
heat, and maybe air conditioning if you livein the desert, and you’re not hungry, you’ve
got ninety percent of what wealth can deliver.
Really, all things considered.
The rest of it is just status and luxury items,but the relationship between position of status
and death rates remain constant.
So that’s very interesting, and we knowthat that’s true from a lot of other studies
as well.
It’s like control for absolute wealth, there’sstill problems with hierarchy, and that seems
mediated at least in part by serotonin, andserotonin regulates negative emotion, and
the more negative emotion that you experience,the more cortisol you produce, and cortisol
in high levels is toxic and suppresses yourimmune system so your brain gets damaged,
and you gain weight and you get diabetes,and maybe develop Alzheimer’s disease and
are maybe more prone to cancer and heart disease,and that’s just not good.
Now that serotonergic mechanism is reallyold, and so you can give serotonin injections
to unhappy lobsters and it cheers them rightup, at least behaviorally speaking.
If they're defeated in a fight, and you givethem a serotonin injection, they’ll stand
up tall, confident and they’ll fight again.
I’m telling you that for a very specificreason.
One of the things we’ve been asking aboutis well how might you conceptualize moral
systems and how might you conceptualize evolution?
One of the propositions was there are playablegames and non-playable games.
Well here’s a playable game.
Dominance hierarchy.
We’ve been playing it for four hundred millionyears.
It’s stable.
Now, it’s so stable that even lobsters havethem, but even worse is that the biochemical
systems the lobsters use act within the dominancehierarchy and react to, it’s the same in
us.
And so, not only is that stable, it’s wellridiculously stable.
So one of the things we could say is thatone of the games that seems emergent and real
is a dominance hierarchy.
And then we might ask what exactly constitutesa dominance hierarchy, and we might ask well
what constitutes a highly functional hierarchyversus a dysfunctional hierarchy, and even
what does highly functional and dysfunctionalmean.
Well we have to define all those terms.
We will, as we move forward.
But the point I’m making is - and this isa bit of a contradiction with the initial
system I made with the tight distinction betweenthe scientific world and the objective world
because I’m also talking about the evolutionof games, and you know, the study of evolution
is a scientific study and the dominance hierarchyis a biological phenomena and so in some sense
it’s also a game, and it’s also a moralstructure and so there are levels of analysis
where these things start to get tangled together,and that’s partly what we’ll try to sort
out.
So, we’ll do that in the future becauseit’s very very complicated.
Alright now we’re gonna step back a littlebit.