So, I want to take another look at this figureto begin with.
Now, one of the reasons that I began to thinkabout these sorts of things is because I wanted
to understand what it might mean to have aset of, let’s say a set of values and beliefs
(because those two things go together), thatwould…
I guess part of the question was, is it possibleto develop of system of beliefs that’s outside
of the realm of ideology?
You know, because one thing you might claimis that it’s all ideology.
Any belief system is ideological.
And if you develop a belief system that criticisesother belief systems it just means that you’ve
developed a new ideological stance.
And there’s some… that’s a good argument,you know.
I can think of a number of ways that it’strue.
One of the things Nietzsche said in the late1800s was that if you inhabited a belief system,
even a religious system, and you lost faithin it, not only did you lose faith in that
system, but you also potentially lost faithin systems themselves.
And so, it was a meta-collapse, in a sense.
Not only did you lose your belief, but youlost your belief in beliefs.
So you think of the set of all possible beliefsand then abandoning any hope of relying on
those as valid sources of information.
You know, so that’s one perspective andit’s a powerful one, and Nietzsche believed
that that was a certain pathway to nihilism,essentially, or perhaps to a reactionary totalitarianism,
but it boils down to the same thing.
I’ve been reading this book recently, thetitle of which I can’t remember, unfortunately.
But I’ll tell it to you after class.
It’s a critique of certain lines of left-wingideological thinking, including the existential
thought of people like Jean-Paul Sartre, andFoucault.
And one of the most trenchant critiques ofSartre, because he believes that you have
an absolute freedom, that you’re destinedfor freedom, that you’re doomed to it, in
some sense.
And that part of your existential journeyis to establish an authenticity that’s correct
for you.
But he doesn’t, he isn’t able really togive any description of what that should be
grounded in.
And the critic concludes that all Sartre cando is stand outside of any potential belief
system and criticise it.
And that that’s… there’s nothing init for anyone as a consequence of that.
It’s only destructive.
Now, it’s important to remember, with regardsto Sartre, that he viewed other people, to
some degree, like the common man, the bourgeoisie,we might say, as the embodiment of non-freedom,
of inauthenticity, and also as a barrier togenuine authenticity.
So he wasn’t willing to give any credenceto the utility of normality.
But I also think he wasn’t able to toleratethe consequences of his own thought, because
he was an avid supporter of the communistparty, far after anyone with any reasonable
moral sense would have stopped doing that.
So Sartre didn’t really denounce the communistsuntil the end of the… beginning of the 70s,
roughly speaking.
He was never a card-carrying communist, buthe was very left-leaning.
And you know by the 1970s, by the late 60s,by the early 70s, a lot of the evidence about
what was going on in Soviet Russia had beenin for 30 years.
So there was really no excuse for not facingup to that, and trying to understand what
it meant.
And you know, it would be bad enough if itwas just the Soviet Union, but it wasn’t.
The same sort of thing happened wherever thoseutopian presuppositions were put into place.
And I suppose many of you don’t know this,but Pol Pot, who was the Cambodian dictator,
was educated at the Sorbonne, and he wrotehis thesis (I think it was his PhD thesis,
although it might have been his Master’sthesis) on the Marxist doctrine that urban
people were parasites on rural people.
So you know, there’s a theory that saysthat the general value is generated purely
by labour, and much of that is rural labour,and the cities siphon off the excess productive
power and are able to parasitize the countrysideas a consequence of that.
Which is a, you know, tremendously non-productivetheory.
But Pol Pot put it in practice, and so whenhe went back to Cambodia he chased everybody
out of the cities and killed about six millionpeople.
So, you know, you can read about that if youwant.
It’s a pretty appalling section of 20thcentury history.
Especially when it was the case that he waseducated in the West and had these presuppositions
drummed into him.
Well then there’s Foucault.
Foucault, who I have no respect for, by theway…
I’ve read a fair bit of Foucault, and Ithink everything he says is obvious.
So for example, he criticises the idea ofmental illness as a social construct.
It’s like, well yeah, obviously.
I mean, it’s not like psychiatrists andpsychologists and mental health professionals,
who are relatively well-informed, haven’tknown about that since… for the last 60
years.
I mean, it might be a revelation to peoplewho don’t notice that psychiatry, for example,
is something like a compromise between thepatient biology and the social world.
You know, I mean, psychiatric ailments oftenhave a biological tilt, but the way they manifest
themselves in society is clearly conditionedin very intense ways by the particular conditions
obtaining at the point that the person whohas that biological predisposition exists,
even when it’s not pathological, can betilted one way or another by cultural norms.
And then of course, when you’re dealingwith issues like insurance payment, and treatment,
and hospitalisation, obviously you’re pullingin all sorts of systems that are by no means
purely scientific.
But I don’t find it a particularly usefulcritique.
It’s obvious, as far as I’m concerned.
And, the other thing that Foucault did.
I mean, I think this is the typical, especiallythe French intellectuals’, typical sleight
of hand once Marxism became… you know, onceyou were no longer able to call yourself a
committed Marxist, because committed Marxismhad led to unbelievable brutality, you know,
on a scale that had never been experiencedin the entire history of the planet, at least
in terms of its reach and duration.
You didn’t get to call yourself a committedMarxist anymore, unless there were people
(and you still see them) saying “well thatwasn’t real Marxism), which I think is a
cop-out of staggering proportions.
It usually means “well if I was the personrunning the country that wouldn’t have happened”.
That’s the logic behind it… “they didn’tput the principles into practice properly”.
It’s like yeah well lots of people put thedamn principles into practice and the same
thing happened everywhere.
So at some point you have to kind of wonderif there’s something wrong with the principles.
Anyways, what Foucault did was take the Marxistpresupposition that everything could be boiled
down to economics and economic power and translateit into the idea that everything just translated
into power, you know.
And that the reason that we have institiutionsis to include and to exclude and that the
institutions always run for the benefit ofthose at the top.
It’s like well yeah, that’s a little bittrue, but it’s… a scientist would look
at that and say well probably… you know,power dynamics in a functioning economic and
political system maybe account for 10% ofthe variance, something like that, maybe 15%.
It’s like, say you want to go to an IvyLeague school.
Well if you’re parents went to the schoolyou’re more likely to get in, but you’re
not that much more likely to get in and youstill have to be… you know roughly speaking
what happens is if you have a pretty decenthigh school GPA and you do very well on the
SATs, and you have some other talents of somesort, because that’s also necessary, then
they might pick you over someone else who’sroughly equally qualified if you have a familial
history attendance at the school.
So obviously you get an advantage, but it’snot the kind of advantage that accounts for
the entirety of how the system is structured.
It’s an advantage.
Well, you can say that’s not fair.
It’s like, yeah okay, fair enough.
Most systems are certainly not 100% eitherfair or just, definitely not.
But, you know, instead of comparing them toutopia you might compare them to another system,
which is the only reasonable way to do it.
It’s like, everything looks terrible whenyou compare it to the best thing you can possibly
imagine.
But the best thing you can possibly imagineis an empty fiction, because it’s so devoid
of detailed content that you can’t use itas a guide to reality.
Now, I mean, the idea that things could bebetter has its roots in, in some sense, a
broad-scale utopian project, and I believethings could be better.
But that doesn’t mean that when you’redoing an analysis of a complex system you
get to compare it to an ideological utopiaand then describe all the reasons that it’s
bad.
It’s not appropriate to do that.
It’s too simplistic, you’re not goingto do anything to actually address the problems
that the system has if you take that approach.
And then, of course, pure utopian thinkingis extraordinarily dangerous.
Because if you think that you’re way ofmolding society into some ultimate state of
perfection is headed towards some ultimatestate of perfection, then you can justify
absolutely anything you do right now, on thebasis of the fact that things are going to
improve so radically in the future.
And that means any of your behaviours areexcused.
The end is worth it.
Well, if someone says that, you have to kindof wonder what they’re actually planning
to do.
Okay, so, well what’s the issue?
The issue is that it’s… so the same critic,with regards to Foucault, said that well it’s
basically the same thing, that Foucault criticiseda variety of profound institutions.
Sexual institutions say, like marriage, andthen institutions of power, like prisons,
and institutions of mental health, like thewhole institutional framework.
He criticised them on the basis of power andexclusion.
And you could do that and there’s some truthin it.
But you know Foucault also made the presupposition,and the problem with that presupposition,
that everything is about something else, isthat it’s almost impossible to see how it
can’t be applied to Foucault himself.
So you’d have to ask, if you were a studentof Foucault, what power aims drove his attempt
to analyse everything in terms of power?
And I actually think with Foucault it’spretty obvious.
But it’s a game that never goes anywhere.
Okay, so I thought about that a lot, it’slike, is there any system that you can develop
that doesn’t have the negative consequencesof systems in general?
And then if that is possible, how and whymight it be possible?
And this is partly why I’m talking to youabout this particular diagram again.
I think the reason, now I don’t know this,and you guys can think it through yourself.
I mean, lots of people have talked to me aboutthe content of this course and you know, they’ve
said that it’s been very helpful for themwhen it comes to interpreting certain elements
of their life.
But some people have said well it’s justanother system.
And I don’t believe that.
I think it’s a meta-system.
And I don’t think the rules that apply tosystems also apply to meta-systems.
But you know, that could just be me.
So you’re going to have to decide that foryourself.
But I think the reason that I can make thatclaim, and that it’s a valid claim is because
first of all, I don’t believe that it’san intellectual system.
I don’t think it’s an attempt to reducea complex set of phenomena to something that
is… dispenses with important elements oftheir existence.
So for example, let me give you an exampleof how that sort of thing happens.
If you’re looking at the world through abiased lens, what it means is that you take
non-random samples of the environmental data.
So I can give you a quick example of somethingI saw that I thought was very particular in
that regard.
I don’t think I’ve used this example before,but about ten years ago or thereabouts Naomi
Klein made this documentary about this factorydown in South America.
I believe it was in Argentina.
And this was just after all the foreign capitalfled out of Argentina and the economy collapsed
completely, which is something that happensto Argentina fairly regularly, by the way.
And she went down there to this factory wherethere were working men and they had been building
heavy machinery.
And the working men had decided that theywere going to… the factory had been padlocked
and they had been locked out because thingshad come to a halt.
And they had decided that they were goingto take a chainsaw to the factory gate and
go in there and start making heavy machineryagain.
And you know, it was a very cool documentaryas far as I was concerned.
She went down there and she interviewed allthese working guys and they talked about how
their lives had been brought to a halt bythe factory closure.
And obviously it sucked that they were sittingaround doing nothing and not being paid for
doing anything when they could’ve been insidethe factory building heavy machinery, which
is what they wanted to do.
So she went down there and laid out theirstory and it was very sympathetic to the workers
and good, you know, fair enough, good.
But then she went and interviewed the guywho owned the factory and she didn’t ask
him any real questions.
What she did instead was caricaturize him,even a priori, you know, as sort of a fascist
capitalist, sort of like the millionaire inMonopoly, and never tried to get beneath the
superficial a priori categorisation to findout what he actually thought.
And I was just waiting, I thought, well thisis cool, what the hell does the factory owner
have to say?
It’s like, where did his money go, why doeshe think he has a right to the factory, like
what are his conditions of ownership?
Did he earn the money?
Did he inherit it?
It’s like, what does he think about thefact that Argentina’s economy has collapsed?
How does he feel about the fact that all theseworkers are out of work?
What does he think about the fact that theyopened up the factory again?
Like, there’s a lot of interesting thingsto ask this guy.
None of it, none of it happened.
And so, to me what happened was that she wassomeone with neglect.
You know, she was looking at the world butshe could only see half of everything.
And the half she saw was probably perfectlyjustifiable, had its proper domain of application,
but the half she missed, well, what aboutthat part of the story?
You’re going to reduce that to cliché andstereotype and expand up the rest of the story?
Well, the only reason you’d do that is ifyou didn’t want to find out what the hell
was going on.
If all you wanted to do was gather evidencethat would support your initial theory.
Now, I know perfectly well that there’splenty of situations where workers, the conditions
of workers are absolutely abysmal.
I mean, one of the books I’ve read thatI think a remarkable documentation of that
is a book by George Orwell called ‘Roadto Wigan Pier’, which is a study of the
conditions that coal miners lived in in the1930s in Britain.
And you know, it’s bloody dismal.
And the idea that they were exploited, well,that’s a tougher one, because the Industrial
Revolution was very, very hard on people,and it was really, really hard on some people.
You know, particularly on some people.
Whether that was because of exploitation orbecause of the existence of absolute poverty
is not all that obvious.
And you know… so it’s a complicated issue.
Now there’s lots of times when workers wereclearly exploited, but I think there are times
as well when they weren’t.
Anyways, it’s a great book, and he doesa lovely job of laying out a rationale for
why the workers should be treated far betterthan they were treated, and you know, so fine,
good, wonderful.
There’s something to be said.
But the thing is when you want to say something,you want to take an unbiased sample if you
can, and so this is why I like this particularmode of conceptualisation, and I think it’s…
the reason I think it’s not an intellectualconstruction is because I think it emerges
naturally out of the structure of mythologyand narrative, and you can think this through
yourself, but as far I’ve been able to tell,narratives present themselves in terms of
archetypal characters.
And the thing about a comprehensive narrativeis it can’t leave out an archetypal character,
or it fails.
Now I can give you an example of this.
So how many of you have seen Disney’s ‘SleepingBeauty’?
Okay, so many of you have.
How many haven’t?
Okay, so there’s a few that haven’t.
Well the Disney movies, you know they’rekind of standard childhood fare.
You know, in Sleeping Beauty, what happensis the King and Queen give birth to a princess
after trying for a substantial amount of time.
And she arrives healthy and beautiful, andthen they have a christening day and they
invite everybody to it.
But they don’t invite Maleficent, who’sa dark witch, roughly speaking.
You know, she’s Queen of the Underworld,for lack of a better word.
She’s the negative element of femininity.
And they don’t invite her to the party.
And so she shows up anyways, and says thatbecause they didn’t invite her, their daughter’s
going to die when she hits sixteen, whichis roughly the age of let’s say sexual maturation
for a story of that sort.
Now there’s another little positive magicfemale in the story, who mitigates that death
sentence to protracted sleep.
Well the idea behind it, it’s a very, veryinteresting story, it’s an Oedipal story
in a sense, because what it says is that ifyou’re parents protect you too much from
the dark side of life when you’re young,what will happen when you start on the road
to maturity is you’ll be so naïve and sofragile that you’ll want to be unconscious
instead of paying attention.
And that you’re going to have to be rescuedfrom that state by something.
And it could be a prince, which is how thestory lays itself out, or it also could be
the symbolically masculine and exploratoryelement of your own psyche.
And the story’s ambivalent about whetherit’s an external event or an internal event,
it doesn’t really matter.
The things end up being the same.
And so that’s actually what happens in thisSleeping Beauty story.
You know, at the end, a prince, who’s alsoenslaved by this terrible negative feminine
force, manages to escape, and Maleficent turnsinto a dragon and then he has to fight her,
and then he goes and rescues the princess.
And she wakes up and the kingdoms rejuvenateand everybody’s happy.
It’s a classic, classic story.
And it’s not… it’s funny because theDisney movie Frozen was put forward as a,
in some sense as a feminist alternative tothe classic fairy tales, but first of all
you can’t do that, you can’t just generateup a fairy tale.
You know, there’s recent evidence that someof these fairy tales, the ones that the Grimm
brothers and Hans Christian Andersen collected,are up to ten thousand years old.
You can’t just come up with a counter-fairytale.
That’s just not how it works.
And the way that a fairy tale is structured,it has nothing to do with the necessity for
anyone to rely on anyone else for anything.
It’s a complex portrayal of the dynamicrelationship between archetypal characters,
and you know, it’s one form of the story.
There’s lots of different forms of the story.
But what I like about Sleeping Beauty forexample, and this is what’s nice about the
real fairy tales, is that along with the positivethere’s negative, and it’s real negative.
Like real fairy tales are terrifying.
I don’t… who is it?
Is it in Sleeping Beauty?
Or Snow White?
I don’t remember.
In one of the famous Grimm fairy tales, oneof the evil sisters ends up dancing in red
hot shoes till she dies.
You know, it’s… they’re very, very violentand unsettling.
And it’s because they have the quality ofgenuine folk tales.
But the reason for that is because they’redealing with real things.
Like the Hansel and Gretel’s story is agood example of that, right?
Kids are abandoned out in the woods.
They find something that’s too good to betrue.
Inside this thing that’s too good to betrue is something that wants to fatten them
up and devour them.
It’s a rough story.
But what it’s doing… the stories haveevolved to represent the fundamental dynamic
elements of existence, if you conceptualiseexistence in terms of character.
And the thing is you have to conceptualiseexistence in terms of character if you’re
a person, because what you do in existenceis act out your character.
So your character is an element of existence.
Now, you might say well that doesn’t meanthat society has a character.
But actually, it does mean that.
Because partly what happens… like if you’resocialised, say, into a culture.
The culture exists in the same relationshipto you, roughly speaking, as another person
does.
So for example, if you put money in the bank,which is in principle a representation of
your labour, what you’re doing is enteringinto a contract with the broader social world,
which is one of promise, essentially, wherethe future society promises to return your
value at a future date.
So it’s a contractual relationship.
And the reason that God the Father is a verycommon representation is because treating
the ‘they’, in Heidegerrian terms, theothers, in Heideggerian terms, as if they’re
an embodied entity, actually works.
So it’s because it is an emergent propertyof all of the personalities that make it up.
And so you’re interacting with that emergentpersonality all the time.
You could even say for example, that that’sthe Freudian Id.
It’s the thing that… the representationof that inside you is what makes you feel
guilty when you transgress against certainmoral rules.
And you might say, along with the radicalexistentialists, that that’s just arbitrary
and that you can create your own values, butit’s not just arbitrary.
Because it’s dependent on the consent ofothers, as well as on some internal harmony
or disharmony.
It’s not arbitrary.
And you can’t just set that up by yourself.
So these things are realities and they’redeep realities.
Now, this particular portrayal indicates akind of balance.
So the fundamental ground of reality is neitherpositive nor negative, it’s the ground out
of which everything positive or negative emerges.
So you might think of the fundamental groundof reality as that which exists prior to your
encounter with it.
And we have no idea what that is.
Now you can think about it as… people tendto think about what things are made of in
atomic terms but it’s not a particularlycomprehensive way of thinking about it.
Because what exists beyond the realm of yourcomprehension is the patterned relationship
between everything and everything.
And you can’t reduce it to any simple levelof analysis because you miss all sorts of
elements of it that are extraordinarily importantif you do that.
So you can’t do that, that’s not whatexperience is made out of, or what the grounded
experience is made out of.
And so it’s neutral in some sense.
Because it exists beyond your encounter withit.
It’s the unknown as such.
And the reason that that’s often representedin the form of a predatory lizard that has
something to offer is precisely because ofthat.
The absolute unknown has the capacity to tearyou into pieces and burn you up, but it also
has the possibility of rewarding you witheverything you could possibly be rewarded
with.
So it’s this strange juxtaposition of potential.
I like to think about it as potential, youknow, because people can get a grip on what
potential means.
There’s potential everywhere, whatever thatis.
You have potential, your parents tell youthat all the time.
What is that?
Well, it’s the unrealised stuff of yourbeing.
Now it’s a very strange concept, potential,because you can’t characterise it any way
that you would characterise something that’sreal.
Because it’s not real, it’s potential.
But you act like it’s real.
You know, you’ll feel guilty that you’renot living up to your potential, you’re
not manifesting your potential.
You want people to interact with you so thatthey allow you to demonstrate your potential.
You act as if it’s a reality continually.
You think as if it’s a reality continually.
You ask if your relationship has potential,you know.
But it’s a very, very strange substance,whatever this potential is.
It’s unrealised possibility, essentially,but you regard it as something that’s fluid
and something that can develop in all sortsof different directions, and something whose
development you can shape.
Because otherwise why would you feel guilty,you know?
It’s like, if you’re doing the wrong thing,you’re realising some potential in the wrong
way, and then you feel bad about that.
It’s like, well, there’s some sense ofintrinsic morality operating at the bottom
of that.
We’ve talked a lot about that.
Some of that’s built in biologically, someof it is structured culturally, some of it
is a consequence of you trying to organiseyour… this plethora of semi-beings that
you are into some integrated manner.
Like it’s a very, very complicated thing.
It’s not just arbitrary.
Okay so that’s the very background, thedragon of chaos, positive and negative.
And it’s the thing out of which everythingsprings.
If you look at the Scandinavian world tree,for example, or world trees in general, you
very frequently have a representation of aserpent that’s associated with them.
The reason that the… that potential is serpentineis extraordinarily complicated, but I think
it’s partly because, say snakes shed theirown skin, so they can be reborn, so they’re
a symbol of transformation.
And then they’re sneaky and subtle and sothey appear in places that you wouldn’t
necessarily expect them to, and then they’rea terrible, terrible threat.
In overcoming that threat, you also develop.
So not only are they a threat, but they’rethe kind of threat that makes you become strong
when you face it.
And that’s partly why the snake is suchan ambivalent figure in most mythology.
Okay, so that’s complicated, but we’llreturn to that later.
And then out of that, you might say, emergesthe unknown as you encounter it.
So there’s potential itself, and then thefirst layer of potential are the things that
you encounter that you don’t understand.
So I can give you an example of that.
So let’s say you’re a three-year-old,or a two-year-old, that’s better, and you’re
in the kitchen and a mouse runs across theroom.
And so you track it because your eyes pickup the movement, and you track the thing.
And then it’s an unexpected occurrence,so you don’t know what it signifies, right.
So that’s the emergence of something tangiblyunknown into your conceptual space.
Now it’s not like you lack any knowledgeof it.
You can tell what its size is, and you canget some estimation of its speed.
And I think what you have to do when you thinkabout whether or not something is unknown
is you have to think about it in relationshipto that hierarchy of perception that I keep
throwing at you.
You know, if something emerges… if you encounteran entity and you can map it at every single
level of your value hierarchy, then it’sknown.
You know how to interact with it at a micro-level,and you know what its implications are for
every other level of your conceptual being.
You know what its implications are for thefuture.
Like you know exactly how to deal with thatthing, it’s mapped at every single level.
There’s other things that are only mappedat one level and not at others.
So maybe the mouse, we’ll say, for the childwho’s never seen a mouse, it’s like…
it shares some commonalities with objectsthat the child is familiar with.
But there’s sufficient novelty so that it’salso contaminated with the unknown, and that
makes the child, basically, semi-startledand alert.
Now the child will immediately refer to anadult, and it’s a technical term, actually,
they’ll look at the adult’s face becausethe adult broadcasts the motivational affective
significance of that event.
And so the child looks, references, and thenreads off the face (and of course the speech
and the bodily actions) exactly what thatthing signifies.
And then if the person that they’re lookingat jumps up on the table and screams, then
that’s one sense of meaning, which is ‘God,this thing is magical, it’s only this big
and look at what effect it has on, you know,my aunt (for the sake of argument), who’s
you know, a pretty competent creature as faras I can tell, being two years old’.
And then if she just dismisses it, you know,her actions are going to determine the meaning
of that phenomenon.
So that’s how the transformation of thesemi-known thing into the more-known thing
occurs.
It occurs almost always in a social context.
You can explore things by yourself, but yourarely actually do that by yourself.
It’s almost always you plugged into a socialapparatus, you know.
So you might be doing the specific investigating,but the social apparatus is around you so
that you can confer with it, and it also shapesthe way that you’re going to interact with
that specific thing.
Okay, so the unknown, that’s generally…the unknown that you encounter, that’s generally
characterised using feminine symbolism.
And I think the reason for that, there’sa bunch of reasons, and we talked about many
of them.
One reason is because females do the sexualselection in human beings, and so they act
as the face of nature.
Another reason is that you can think of newpossibility always emerging out of the non-cultural
background, in some sense.
So for example, let’s say that we send anexpedition to Mars, and we’re gathering
new information as a consequence.
The reason we’re gathering new informationis because we’ve gone out past the domain
of our knowledge, in a sense, and we’reinteracting with something new.
And in that interaction, new information isgenerated.
Now you can say that it’s partly the actof the perceiver that’s generating the new
information, and you can say that it’s partlythe act of the culture.
Because we sent robots to Mars, let’s say,which is very, very difficult.
So the culture goes there but the individualsare observing, so the individuals are buttressed
by the culture.
But they’re generating information becausethey’re somewhere truly new.
And so the information… the unknown is aconstant source of new information.
So it’s a place that gives birth to newinformation.
And so that’s another part of the reasonthat it seems to be symbolised in feminine
form.
You know, I’m just taking this, in somesense, as an empirical fact.
I’ve looked at… it looks like that’show these stories work.
And so I’ve been trying to puzzle out whyexactly that would be the case.
I also think it’s the case that we tendto look at the world from a social cognitive
perspective.
We filter it through a social, cognitive,biological apparatus.
And so we’re very likely to see things incharacter form, and characters have sexes,
and so that’s going to happen.
And then which, the attributes of femininityor the attributes of masculinity, that get
used as symbolic reference in some sense,there’s an arbitrariness involved.
So for example, for the Egyptians… you know,usually have a sky god, but they had a sky
goddess.
Now, she usually represents the night sky,which is not exactly the same thing as the
day sky, but you have to... it’s so trickybecause you have to look at the relationships
between the characters in order to decidewhat all of them mean, and that shifts a little
bit from story to story.
So this is a, what would you say, it’s anapproximation of the underlying structure,
but there’s a fair bit of variation in it,just like there’s variance in stories.
Well the feminine element has a destructiveelement and a creative aspect.
And you can see that people characterise theirenvironments in that way.
So for example, you can map on environmentalbeliefs onto this structure.
You can say that the environmentalist portraysnature as positive, portrays culture as negative,
and portrays the individual as negative.
And the basic story is rampaging individualas member of rapacious culture invading the
pristine landscape of beautiful Mother Nature.
Now the thing about that story is it’s true.
The problem with that story is that it’shalf true.
So for example, one thing that’s interestingto conceptualise is that that’s exactly
the opposite of the frontier myth.
Now the frontier myth was a story that wasused extensively in Europe to drive immigration
into the United States.
And it was used to some degree in Canada too.
And so the story was the exact opposite.
It’s the hero, so that would be the immigrantpioneer, bringing the benefits of order to
a savage wilderness.
Well that’s also true, but it’s so interestingthat both of those things can be true, and
they’re completely different from one another.
There’s no commonality at all between thosetwo stories, except for the way that they
use the characters.
There’s a feminine character, a masculinecharacter (that represents culture), and then
there’s another character that representsthe individual.
And you could even see that, if you thinkabout it historically, the US was founded
in some sense on the frontier myth, and thatwas to one side.
And so by the time the 1960s came along, theearly 1960s, it shifted to its opposite.
And you need that, because systems have tooscillate to some degree to remain stable
across time.
They can’t just be fixed in place.
So they’re going to play back and forththrough the archetypes in an attempt to keep
them balanced because that’s what you’retrying to do, you’re trying to keep them
balanced.
And so, you have the destructive and creativeelement of Mother Nature.
You see that all the time in movies wherethe thing that the hero is striving against
is the negative element of the unknown.
How many of you have seen the movie ‘Alien’?
Okay so that’s a pretty graphic representationof, well those aliens were more reptilian
in form, so they’re almost like… they’remore at the dragon of chaos level of civilisation,
but they’re a terrible external force that’sthreatening human culture and the individual.
It’s exactly the opposite story that’splayed out in… what was the movie with all
the blue creatures?
Avatar, right.
Avatar is exactly the opposite of that, whereyou know, the unknown nature is just nothing
but sweetness and bliss.
And the culture is portrayed as spear-headedby greedy and rapacious individuals who are
basically manifestations of the military industrialcomplex.
The funny thing is that those both made goodstories.
And that’s because… well, it’s becausethey have enough archetypal truth so that
there’s many situations that they’re relevantto.
You know, sometimes Mother Nature is yourbest friend, and sometimes it’s your worst
enemy.
And so you could go down to the jungles ofPeru, and you could talk to the people who
live there, and you could find out what theyknow about medicinal plants in the jungle,
and you could bring home things to cure disease.
Or you could just go down there and get lostin the jungle and then you’re dead.
You know in some sense it’s the same jungle.
And whether it’s positive or negative dependson what stance you take towards it and how
you behave.
And so the other thing that’s really interestingabout mythology, and this is the lovely element
of mythology, is that part of what it doesis tell you how to take this incredibly complex
landscape that’s positive and negative atthe same time, at every level of analysis,
and how to navigate through it so that theproper balance is maintained as far as the
entire system is concerned.
So the culture has an orderly element, andthat’s what protects us here, and it has
a tyrannical element, and that’s what makesyou treated like numbers at the University
of Toronto.
You know, you get both of those at exactlythe same time.
And then the archetypal individual has thesame fundamental nature.
Hero or villain.
And you know those have archetypal roots,because the ultimate hero is the ultimate,
perfect person.
And the ultimate villain is Satan himself,in whatever form he happens to take.
It doesn’t take much knowledge of the structurebefore you can see it manifested all over,
especially in movies that are particularlypopular, because they almost always have a
central archetypal theme.
The Marvel superhero movies are a really goodexample of that.
And if it’s complex literature, the archetypesare mixed to some degree.
So you have a hero who’s not only a hero,you have a hero who has all sorts of flaws.
And he’s in a culture, or she’s in a culture,that has positive elements and negative elements
and they’re in a broader landscape that’scharacterised by exactly the same thing.
So it’s nuanced.
And the more sophisticated you get, the moreyou can tolerate that kind of nuance.
And I think that’s also one of the things…that’s partly why literature is such a good
antidote to ideology.
Because the more sophisticated the literaturebecomes, the more complex, and fragmented
in some sense, or differentiated, the moredifferentiated the archetypal landscape becomes.
So when someone tells you a story, whateverthe story happens to be, one of the things
you can do when you know the substructures,is you can say ‘okay yeah, but where are
the missing pieces?
Where are they going?’
Because if they’re not included then they’regenerally projected onto something.
Because they’re there, you can’t get awayfrom them, they’re there.
How does the person account for them?
Alright, so now I want to tell you anotherstory.
So we talked about the Mesopotamian creationmyth last week, and now I want to tell you
about the Egyptian myth of sovereignty.
And so, the first thing I should do is saythat all of the stories that I’m talking
to you about have all sorts of variance.
And so, the Egyptian story that I’m goingto describe lasted for thousands and thousands
of years, and so it isn’t like there wasonly one variation of it, there’s all sorts
of variations of it, and I’m only goingto tell you one of them.
And that’s a limitation, but that’s justhow it is for the time being.
So I’m not saying that this is the onlyversion of this story.
But it’s a version, and it’s the one I’mmost familiar with, and so I can talk about
it, hopefully with some utility.
And it’s a great story.
When I finally figured out what it meant…it’s so cool, with some of these stories
if you crack them, and you’re able to seewhat they mean, they’re absolutely overwhelming.
They’re so bloody brilliant, it’s no wonderthat people regard them as revelatory, you
know, of divine origin, because they havesuch power that it’s almost impossible to
imagine how that could’ve got there.
Now, I provide you with the Darwinian explanationof how that got there, right, because the
stories are representations of social contractsand behavioural tendencies that have evolved
over thousands and thousands of years.
Because of that, the representation, the story’sgoing to have way more information in it than
a typical story might.
But I still can understand how these thingsburst upon people with the force of revelation.
One of the things that’s quite interestingtoo, if you look at cultures historically,
is that you usually find that the revelationof the story… it’s like the energy source
on which the culture feeds.
So the story comes first, it has this tremendousdynamic energy.
The culture basically uses that energy topropel itself through time, you know, to give
itself conviction and force.
And then at some point the story exhaustsitself, and that would be equivalent, in some
sense, I suppose, to Nietzsche’s announcementof the death of God.
And this has happened many times.
Alright, so there’s four main charactersin the Egyptian story.
There’s Osiris, Isis, Set, and Horus.
Now, Osiris, we’ll start with Osiris, butyou could start with any of the characters,
because one of the things that’s quite interestingabout mythology is that the myths don’t
make any distinction between the causal priorityof these characters.
Any of them can be regarded as fundamental.
So the hero is the person who separates theworld parents for example, and brings being
into existence.
But you can also say well it’s Tiamat, whichis more how the Mesopotamian creation myth
is tilted, or you can say you can’t makesense out of anything unless you have a cultural
lens through which you’re looking.
Like there has to be some pre-existent structurebefore information can be generated in any
manner.
So you’re always stuck with this problem,that in order for something to exist you need
a substrate, you need an interpretive substructure,and you need an interpreter.
And you can’t say that one of those thingprecedes the other.
They all have to be there at the same time.
You could say from a Darwinian perspective,they all emerged and complexified in unison
as time progressed.
It doesn’t explain how the origin originated,however.
Okay, so you’ve got Osiris.
Now Osiris is the founder of the Egyptianstate.
And so, you know, before people wrote thingsdown, you have to kind of try to understand
how it was that they remembered things.
Their memory was more like an amalgam, ora gist.
So we already know that if you tell the storyof your actions yesterday that it doesn’t
take you 16 hours to tell the story.
Hopefully it takes you like five minutes.
And why that is is not obvious, but part ofthe reason is, for whatever underlying reasons,
you know what parts of the story are relevantto other people, and what parts aren’t.
So basically what you’re going to do istry not to tell them things they already know.
Because that would just be pointless.
And in order to do that you more or less haveto know what they know and what they don’t
know.
And you have to more or less stay on the edgeof that.
But you can do that.
Well, I might ask you, well what did you doover the last three months, or I could say
what have you done for the last couple ofyears?
And in each case you’re going to collapsethat into some representation.
Now imagine that the problem you’re tryingto solve is ‘what did your culture try to
do for the last five thousand years?’
Well imagine that there are… the culturein part is being continually informed by the
individuals that compose it.
And there’re going to be different individualsof different stature who discover things of
different importance.
And we often know some people like that.
We know of Thomas Edison, for example, andwe can name actual people.
But that’s in part because we write thingsdown and have records of them.
You can imagine though that you’re tryingto represent your history in a way that you
can remember.
You’re going to tell stories about peoplewho have done interesting things, because
that’s what you even when you tell a storyabout yourself.
So imagine you tell one story about someonewho did something interesting and then you
tell another story about someone else whodid something interesting, and so forth.
And that’s continually going on, let’ssay, in a tribal or archaic culture.
So then what you get is a set of stories aboutpeople doing interesting things.
Well, it’s easy for that to shift into theancestors doing interesting things.
And then it’s easy for that to shift intothe ancestor doing wonderful things.
And that’s basically what happens, is thatyou get the emergence of the culture story,
which is something like a small set of culturalheroes who have done all the things that are
worth doing.
And what you’re doing is imitating them.
And you know, this is… you know, your empiricalmemory of events only lasts about a hundred
years.
Because there isn’t anyone old enough toremember anything past that.
And so what has to happen is that everythingthat happened before that has to be collapsed
into some form that’s memorable, so thatit can be brought forward and taught, and
that’s the function of these stories.
These stories actually… it’s almost asif the story has abandoned everything that
hasn’t stuck in people’s memories.
And so all that’s left is the most significant…is the most significance.
Because otherwise why would people botherwith it?
They wouldn’t tell the story, they wouldn’tbe gripped by it.
Okay, so Osiris, he’s one of these figures.
You could think… if you allowed people totell stories of George Washington, say, and
Abe Lincoln, and all the semi-mythologisedfounders of the United States, if you allowed
people, in the absence of textbooks and writing,to tell stories about those men for the next
thousand years, maybe what you’d get outof that is an origin story of the mythic founder
of the state.
And that seems to be what’s happened inthe Egyptian case with Osiris.
Now he’s a god, but he’s got human characteristics.
And so he’s also granted the status of somethingthat’s eternal.
Okay now, here’s the story of Osiris, roughlyspeaking.
He’s kind of old now, and he’s a littlebit blind, but he’s blind in a specific
way.
And the way that he’s specifically blindis that he’s wilfully blind.
Now if you’re wilfully blind about… theEgyptians say this straightforwardly, and
I’ll tell you why they believe this.
If you’re wilfully blind there’s thingsthat you could know that you take pains not
to know.
And wilful blindness, under English commonlaw, can be grounds for criminal conviction.
So for example, if you run a company and youthink that your treasurer is cooking the books
but it’s working to your favour, and youdecide ‘well, I just won’t look’, and
then later it comes out, you could say ‘wellI didn’t know’, and the people who are
prosecuting would say ‘yeah but you couldhave known and you took a conscious choice
not to know, so you’re culpable.’
And I think that’s actually the best modelof Freudian repression, in a sense.
It isn’t exactly repression, it is failureto make the effort to know something that
you could know.
Now, sometimes you…
look, sometimes something terrible happensto you and you just can’t understand it.
But sometimes something terrible is happeningand you refuse to think about it.
And because you refuse to think about it youreally don’t know what it is.
And you might say, ‘well I can’t be culpablethen because I don’t know what it is’,
but you could have known, so you’re culpable.
So it’s voluntary ignorance.
And that’s the problem with Osiris.
He was a great guy when he was young, he wasa hero.
He founded the Egyptian state.
But you know he’s not everything he couldbe anymore.
He’s gotten anachronistic and outdated andwilfully blind, which is even worse.
Now there’s an idea here.
It’s such a bloody brilliant idea, it’smindboggling.
So Osiris is the state manifested in personifiedform, and that’s reasonable, because the
state is like a person.
The person of the state is manifested in thebody of laws, and you guys all imitate that
body of laws, and that’s what basicallymakes you citizens of the state.
So that’s what makes you citizens of thestate.
You can all get along because all of you areimitating the same thing, and what you’re
imitating is the central body of custom andlaw that makes up the state.
And that’s why you can predict each other.
So that makes you a good citizen.
Now the problem with being a good citizenis that sometimes if you’re a good citizen
you’re a bad person.
That’s a big problem.
So for example, the better you were at beinga Nazi, in all likelihood, the worse a person
you were.
And so that’s a very useful observation,because one of the things it shows is that
even though it’s necessary for you to imitatethe central personality of the state, sometimes
the central personality of the state can bepathological.
And the Egyptians, who had established quitea lengthy state (as opposed, say, to the Mesopotamians…
the Egyptians had been existing in a complexstate apparatus for a very long period of
time), they started to encounter problemsthat were intrinsic to the state.
Now you remember, in the Mesopotamian creationmyth, the primary danger was Tiamat.
You know, you make a lot of racket, you killApsu, that’s order, Tiamat comes flooding
back and takes you out.
Well you can imagine that that would be theprimary story of people in a civilisation
that was somewhat fragile.
They’re a hell of a lot more worried aboutbeing invaded by the next, you know, round
of barbarians, or having their crops fail,or being flooded out or something like that,
than they are concerned about whether or notthe whole state apparatus has become corrupt
and is going to collapse.
Now they’re partly concerned about that,because remember Marduk, the emperor, is supposed
to be being a good Marduk and keeping an eyeon everything.
But the myth, the mythic structure only talksabout Apsu a tiny little bit, it basically
says ‘don’t kill Tiamat’s consort oryou’ll make her angry’.
The Egyptians take that a lot farther.
They look at Osiris and they say ‘well hewas… there was something really good about
him.
Without him we wouldn’t even have our state,so we bloody well better be happy about that,
because the state is better than no state’.
You know, you could say pathological orderis better than absolute chaos.
Now you can have an argument about that but…whatever, it’s, you know, it depends on
how pathological the order, obviously.
But it isn’t that untrammeled chaos is agood solution.
I think that you can, and I’m only usingthis as an example… you know, the Americans,
and us as well, went into Iraq to take outa person who was clearly a dictator.
And who had… who was a pretty bad guy andwho had really bad sons.
And his heroes were people like Stalin andHitler.
Well, they took him out.
Well then what?
Well, then all hell broke loose.
You know, because the theory was, you takeout the bad guy at the top and all the good
guys at the bottom get together and instantlythey have a good government.
It’s like, that isn’t what happened atall, what happened was the whole state degenerated
into chaos.
And partly out of that chaos came ISIS, andit’s not self-evident that ISIS is preferable
to Hussein.
At least Hussein educated all the women, andhe was relatively secular, all things considered.
So I’m not making a case for Hussein, mypoint is that, you know, you have to be careful
when you disrupt order, even when it’s pathological,because God only knows what’s going to spring
forth.
And that doesn’t mean that you should nevertry to overcome pathological order, but it
does mean that you should be very, very carefulwhen you do so.
You know, you have to do a micro-analysisin some sense to make sure that you know what
the hell you’re doing.
Alright so anyways, Osiris, he’s a goodguy man, he established the state, he was
a great guy, he was a hero, he, you know,made order out of chaos, and that’s where
you live, so great.
But he’s a little old, a little out of date,and he’s wilfully blind, and that’s so
smart because I think what the Egyptians didis encapsulate in narrative form the primary
danger of all human institutions.
There’s two of them.
And Eliade talks about this a lot with regardsto flood mythology.
So here’s an example.
There are flood myths all over the world,and there may have even been a flood, there’s
pretty good archeological evidence for that,that there was a great flood about 13,000
years ago, when a bunch of comets hit theEarth and melted the North American ice shield,
but we won’t get into that.
But it doesn’t really matter, because themythological sub-structure of the story still
has the same meaning regardless of its historicalreality.
So in the Biblical story of the flood, basicallywhat happens is that humanity is created,
then they degenerate rapidly.
And they get so degenerate, which is sortof like the elder Gods getting out of hand
in the Mesopotamian story, that God thinks,‘oh to hell with all of you, you’re a
big mistake, I’m just going to wipe youout’.
But he finds one good guy, that’s Noah,and out of Noah, who’s like another Adam,
in some sense, the world of human beings isregenerated.
But the idea is that corrupt people get washedaway.
And Eliade talks about the flood myth allover the world, Mircea Eliade, and he says
that generally speaking there’s two reasonswhy the deities flood the planet.
And one is the system is old and out-dated,and the second is that people are corrupt.
And then if you get the two things workingtogether, you get a system that’s out of
date that becomes pathological faster becausepeople are corrupt.
And so I think that you can use the floodin New Orleans as a good example of that.
Because on the one hand you can say, wellit was a hurricane.
So that’s a natural disaster.
But on the other hand you could say, wellpeople knew the damn dykes were too weak,
and they didn’t do anything about it, youknow, they were only built for a hundred year
storm.
And Louisiana is corrupt beyond belief, Imean, for a democratic state, it’s not corrupt
compared to most states, but it’s reallycorrupt compared to most democratic states,
and if you dump money into Louisiana it justgoes into people’s pockets anyways and the
infrastructure doesn’t get fixed up.
So then you might ask yourself, well was theflood a consequence of a natural disaster,
or the blindness of the culture?
Well, you can never tell which of those aretrue.
If you freeze to death in the winter is itbecause it’s cold or because you’re stupid?
You know, there’s no difference betweenthose two things.
So if you get wiped out, it’s because naturecomes after you and because your culture isn’t
sufficient to protect.
And so you can’t separate those two things.
Okay, so… now the other case that the Egyptiansare making, and this is quite cool, is that
if you take a system that’s doing just fine,and you just leave it alone long enough, it
becomes dysfunctional.
And there is a bunch of reasons for that.
I mean, you know, you can imagine that youtake your laptop, and it’s in perfect working
order, and you put it in the closet for twentyyears, and you take it out, what do you have?
Well, it’ll still turn on.
Do you have a laptop?
Well no, by then it won’t even work, itwon’t be able to communicate with the internet,
there won’t be any peripherals that couldplug into it, the software would be so outdated
that you wouldn’t even know how to use it.
Like it’s a brick, basically.
And so the point is that, and you can reallysee this with electronic equipment, a perfectly
functional thing, maintained in stasis, ofits own accord becomes dysfunctional.
And so what that means is that you have torun around like a mad hyena just keeping your
things working.
Now of course you know that, because how muchtime do you spend in a month updating your
electronics?
You know, it’s just a treadmill of updates.
I think part of the reason they haven’tcontributed to overall productivity is because
people take all the time they used to wastetyping things out on paper trying to keep
their efficient electronics actually working.
And you know, learning all the things youhave to learn and re-learning them.
There’s this scene in Alice in Wonderland.
So Alice is in the Underworld, right?
And she meets the Red Queen down there.
So that’s Mother Nature.
And she’s always running around going ‘offwith their heads!
Off with their heads!’ in an arbitrary way,which is of course what the Red Queen does.
And at one point she tells Alice, which issuch a… it’s such a remarkably deep line,
she says to Alice ‘in my Kingdom you haveto run as fast as you can just to stay in
the same place.’
And that’s exactly right.
So you can think, the environment that you’retrying to adapt to is a dynamic concatenation
of patterns and it’s transforming acrosstime.
Not completely unpredictably, but certainlynot predictably.
And so that means if you build a structurethat’s adapted to it, that structure has
to change and flow in keeping with the changeand flow of the underlying environment or
it gets outdated.
You know, it gets obsolescent.
And so all you have to do is sit there anddo nothing and you become obsolescent.
And so that’s the problem with Osiris beingold.
He was a good guy when he was young, but he’sold now, and the old solutions don’t solve
the new problems.
And you could call that an Egyptian existentialstatement.
All of you have a culture.
It’s old.
It doesn’t apply.
Or it doesn’t apply well.
And so what are you going to do with it?
Are you going to throw the whole thing out?
Well we know what happens, the Mesopotamiansalready told us what happens if you do that.
It’s like, Tiamat comes flooding back andall hell breaks loose, so you can’t throw
everything away, but it doesn’t work verywell, so it’s up to you to figure out how
to fix it.
Okay so… but now Osiris has got anotherproblem.
So you might say… well let’s say you’vegot an old computer (this, by the way [points
to computer], in case you haven’t noticed,is a very old computer), and if you keep tapping
on it, and upgrading it a little bit, youcould keep it more or less up-to-date.
At some point you’re going to throw thewhole damn thing away.
But you could do incremental changes to iton a continual basis, and the thing will more
or less stay functional.
You could think about those incremental changesas partial revolutions, right?
Remember that hierarchy.
Now and then you have to change the operatingsystem.
That sucks, because that means everythingoperating underneath virtually has to change.
But more often you’re doing a tweak hereand a tweak there, at lower, more specific
levels, and if you tweak enough then the probabilitythat the whole thing is going to collapse
and you’ll have to do a clean install isquite low.
Well the same thing applies to the state,logically enough.
This is the state.
If you think that your laptop isn’t thestate then you’re not thinking about your
laptop properly.
It’s the state.
And it’s going to be more and more the stateas we progress over the next twenty years.
So you know that if you’re aware and youkeep the updates up and you stay awake that
you can keep the thing functioning.
At some point it’s going to get anachronistic,it’s better to just replace it, which is
also by the way what’s going to happen toall of you, right?
And it’s a decision that evolution, in somesense, and biology has made, that at some
point trying to keep you updated is so bloodycomplicated that you might as well get rid
of the whole thing and let something new occur,and I’m really dead serious about this,
because death evolved.
You know, you have elements in you that arethree and a half billion years old.
Not everything dies.
And some creatures are functionally immortal.
But not us.
And the reason is, well at some point we’retoo old to be updated, and so that’s the
end of that.
Seems to happen about over a hundred yearperiod.
Anyways, now imagine you just ignore yourcomputer completely.
You don’t update the thing at all.
Well, it’s going to get anachronistic ofits own accord, but if you refuse to engage
in those operations that would keep it updated,it’s going to get anachronistic a lot faster.
And that’s what happens to Osiris, theysay the same thing.
It’s like, he’s old, and that’s partof the problem, he’s past his prime.
But the worst part of the problem is thathe’s wilfully blind.
He won’t take action even though he knowsit’s necessary.
And so he gets out of date and pathologicalfaster than necessary.
Now when you hear in the flood stories thatGod is angry about the sins of men, and that’s
why He washes everything away, it’s thesame idea.
Now the word ‘sin’ comes from the Greekword hamartia, and hamartia is an archery
term.
And to sin means not to hit the centre ofthe target.
And so basically the idea in the flood storiesis that if enough people aren’t aiming at
the target, or hitting the centre, then thingsare going to get so corrupt and unstable that
everything is going to get washed away.
And that’s right, it’s exactly, perfectlyaccurate.
Which is very, very cool.
It’s remarkable that that’s the case.
Okay, so now Osiris (because this is a myth)has an evil brother.
Now that’s a pretty common occurrence.
If you look at The Lion King (which is verymuch the Egyptian creation myth, by the way),
the Lion King… what’s the old guy’sname?
The old lion.
Mufasa.
He has a brother, right?
What’s his brother?
Scar!
And what’s the problem with Scar?
He’s scarred.
Right, so you know, he says he’s from thebottom of the gene pool.
And you know, he’s been in second placeall his life, and he’s very, very intelligent.
He worships his own intelligence.
He regards himself as a higher form of intellect,which is a very common characteristic of evil
brother is mythology, and there’s a reasonfor that.
And he’s scarred because life has scarredhim.
And he’s bitter and resentful and he wantsto bring down the order and he wants to kill
the son of the king.
I mean, he’s a bad guy.
Now the problem is that Mufasa underestimateshim, and that’s exactly what happens to
Osiris.
So Osiris has this brother, Set, or Seth.
And I’ve a sneaking suspicion that our word‘set’, for setting Sun is from that word,
although I don’t know that for sure.
But sounds are generally… sounds in languageremain stable across a very long period of
time, and set was definitely, from the Egyptianperspective, the enemy of the Sun.
You know, that’s part of the Egyptian cosmology.
And the Sun is associated with illuminationand brightness and daytime consciousness and
clear apprehension and vision, and all thosethings.
And of course night is opposed to that, unconsciousnessand blindness and danger, and all of those
things.
So anyways, Set, he’s pretending to be Osiris’sloving brother, but he’s not.
He’s plotting to overthrow him first chancehe gets.
And so he’s just sitting in the background,feeding him bad advice, waiting for him to
get weak enough so that he can strike.
Now the name Set is taken by the EgyptianCoptics and turned into Satan.
So Set is the precursor of the Christian Satan.
So the reason I’m telling you that is sothat you can see how these ideas, these archetypal
ideas of corruption and evil are extraordinarilyancient, and they’re part of the process
whereby people are trying to figure out whatthe right way is to act and what the wrong
way is to act, and what the right way is toset up institutions and what the wrong way
is to set up institutions.
So it’s a very, very long process.
And it’s not something that someone justsat around and thought up.
It’s way, way deeper than that.
So anyways, Osiris is being, you know, gettingweaker and being blind, and one day Set thinks
‘alright, time for action’, so he takeshis brother and he chops him up into little
pieces.
Now, Osiris is a god, so you’re not goingto kill him, but you can make it very difficult
for him to get his act together.
So basically what happens is Osiris fallsapart.
Now think about that.
You fall apart.
People say that.
The relationship fell apart.
I fell apart.
Things fall apart.
What does that mean?
Well it means that a thing is usually a complexunity of multiple sub-entities, and sometimes
what holds them together, the superordinatestructure, collapses, and all that’s left
are the things.
Because you know, when you fall apart, youdon’t completely fall apart.
You know, you’re still alive.
What’s happened is that the unity of yourpsychological structure has been fragmented.
And that’s a trip to the underworld, man.
So you’re going to be unhappy.
I broke up with my partner and then I fellapart.
Well everyone knows what that means.
Okay, so that’s what happens to Osiris.
Things fall apart.
So then Set, being a sneaky sort of character,takes all of Osiris’s pieces and he puts
them all over Egypt.
He hides them here and there so that Osirisis going to have a hell of a time recollecting
himself and getting his act together and comingback.
And so, things fall apart.
Now the same thing happens in The Lion King,obviously, because Scar kills Mufasa.
So fine, then Set rules.
That’s not a good day for the Egyptians.
Remember what happens in The Lion King whenScar rules?
The environment becomes completely devastatedbecause they overhunt, right?
So you get total environmental devastation.
It’s all black and burnt.
And, you know, nothing is functioning properly.
And remember after Simba comes back to setthings right it starts to rain and everything
comes back to life.
Well it’s another indication of the ideathat you really can’t separate the environment
from the culture, you know, they’re in adynamic system of interaction.
Anyways, Osiris, things have fallen apart.
Well Osiris has a wife, he has to, he’sKing of Order.
Well, we’re missing someone, we’re missingthe Queen of Chaos, we’re missing the Queen
of the Underworld.
That’s Isis.
Now Isis was a long-lasting goddess.
There’s been goddess religions forever.
There’s an idea among misinformed feministanthropologists that the original religious
structures were feminine, earth-goddess typereligions, and then they were replaced by
patriarchal religions.
And there’s no historical evidence for that.
And the best work I know on that is actuallythrough the Jungians…
Jung and Eric Neumann.
Because what they figured out… they’rekind of on the same track, thinking about
the same idea, that there seems to be a shiftbetween matriarchal values to patriarchal
values, and that that was a historical shift.
But what they actually found out instead wasthat’s a shift in mythological idea.
It’s not a historical reality.
And it’s useful as a mythological idea butyou shouldn’t project it backwards onto
time and make it a historical reality.
Anyways, Isis, she’s been Queen of the Underworldforever.
Now of course, when order collapses, chaosreappears, and that’s what happens.
Isis pops up out of the Underworld and herhusband’s missing and she’s not very happy
about that.
So she wanders all over Egypt looking forhis phallus.
And so… now that’s an interesting idea,because it touches on the biology of innovation,
in some sense.
So you’ve heard of the notion of a seminalidea.
Well, that’s a mythologically informed metaphor.
And so the idea is that, in biological reproduction,semen falls on fertile ground, and out of
that something emerges.
Well, there’s a tight analogue between thatand what happens in the Egyptian myth with
regards to sexuality.
Now, Jung and Freud had a big argument aboutthis, eh, because Freud thought that you could
reduce everything to sexuality.
And Jung said no no, what you don’t understandis that sexuality itself is often used as
a symbol for something even more profound.
And they didn’t agree on that, and that’spart of why they went their separate ways.
Freud was very much unwilling to believe thatreligion could be anything other than a set
of defensive and repressive beliefs and practicesdesigned to protect you from death anxiety.
That was basically his hypothesis.
And it’s wrong.
I mean, there is that element, of course,because you can use dogma to protect yourself
against all sorts of things.
But you can’t reduce a whole damn thingto that.
You have got to watch people of any type,that are intellectuals, who will tell you
that everything can be reduced to one cause.
You know, it’s like a misplaced monotheism.
Lots of people do that.
For Marx it’s economics or class warfare,for Freud it’s sexuality (although he also
considers aggression), for Foucault it’spower.
You know, it’s like no, it’s not thatsimple.
You can make a good story out of those motivations,because they’re powerful motivations, and
they do affect everything, but that doesn’tmean they cause everything uni-dimensionally.
Okay, so anyways, Isis pops up, Queen of theUnderworld, Set takes control, chaos emerges
from the Underworld, Isis wanders around,she finds Osiris’s phallus, and she makes
herself pregnant.
Well, so what does that mean?
Well, it means a lot of things.
One thing it means is that if a great systemfalls apart, the parts still have life.
And, you know, you could think about that.
People often talk about the stability (tothe degree that it’s stable)… part of
the stability of capitalism is its creativedestruction.
Capitalism allows great enterprises to collapseand disperse.
But they don’t break down into sub-atomicparticles, right?
They collapse but the pieces they collapseinto still have life, some of them more than
others.
And then if something collapses, sometimespart of the thing that collapsed has enough
life to build something new out of the pieces.
That’s the same thing that happens to youwhen you undergo a radical, revolutionary
transformation in your character.
You might even feel like you’re dying.
And in some sense the organising principlesby which you lived are dying.
That’s what’s taking you out.
And it’s painful.
Those things are alive.
It’s no trivial matter to be taken apart.
But you know, you hope that you get takenapart, you can find some new information down
there in the chaos, and that’s your unionwith Isis, roughly speaking.
And out of that union of information fromthe chaos and the parts of you that are left,
you could come springing back.
And everyone hopes that, and often it’sthe case.
You know, one of the lessons you can derivefrom Egyptian mythology is bloody well stay
awake.
And make the little corrections when you needto.
Don’t be wilfully blind, because if you’rewilfully blind you’re going to store up
chaos, because you’re not keeping it atbay.
And then one day when you’re weak it’sjust going to take you out.
And that happens.
That happens to people all the time.
They let things around them degenerate backinto chaos.
And then one day they’re weak, and somethingelse comes along to hit them, and they’re
done.
They can’t get up.
It’s too heavy and too hard a hit.
And so then they’re down in the Underworldand they stay there.
The general rule is if you’re going to goto the Underworld, it’s better to go on
purpose and for short voyages.
And that’s the idea behind voluntary exposure,right?
Find out what you don’t want to look at.
It’s easy enough to do that, because you’regoing to see yourself avoiding it.
Then figure out how you can approach it andorder some of it, in as big chunks as you
can manage.
And you can do that all the time.
Stay awake.
Because then you keep your infrastructureproperly maintained, and the probability that
you will tolerate a powerful blow is much,much higher.
It’s not certain.
That’s the other thing about myths.
They tell you the best way to negotiate throughlife, but they never tell you that that will
work.
They just tell you that that’s your bestbet.
And so yeah, maybe that’s enough.
It might be enough.
Okay, anyways, so Isis finds Osiris’s phallus,and gets pregnant.
And then back to the Underworld she goes.
And she goes through her pregnancy and shegives birth to Horus.
Now that’s a pretty common story, right?
That’s the long lost rightful king.
You know, in King Arthur, for example, Arthurhas to be taken away from the castle to be
raised, basically in isolation.
It’s a very, very common story.
And the reason… the same thing happens HarryPotter, right?
Harry Potter is stuck with these Dursleysand they just… they’re like every resentful
child’s image of their parents.
Maybe it’s more like every resentful 13-year-old’simage of their parents.
And you know, the truth of the matter is thatyou are kind of stuck off in the normative
wastelands of your culture.
You have your specific parents, they’renot archetypal representatives of reality,
they’re your parents.
They’re nature and culture, but in finiteand flawed human form.
And what that means in part is you are raisedoutside the domain of your culture.
It’s old, it isn’t working very well,and it’s not transmitted very well to you.
So you grow up outside of it, you’re alienatedfrom it.
That’s that existential alienation, butpeople have always felt alienated from their
damn culture, because it’s old, and it’ssort of blind.
And there you are young and dynamic and fullof life and all it’s telling you is you
can do this and you can’t do that.
And then you know, lying to you about somethings, and doing a pretty nasty job of others.
So you’re outside it, you’re alienatedfrom it.
And that’s what happens to Horus.
He’s outside, in the Underworld.
That’s where he gets born.
And so that’s worth thinking about too.
Anyways, he grows up.
Now Horus is an interesting sort of character.
So you’ve all seen the image of the Egyptianeye, right?
Everyone knows that image.
Even now, which is pretty cool.
So it’s got an eyebrow and it’s got aneye in the middle and then it’s got the
iris, and usually the pupil is so big thatit covers the whole iris.
And there’s a variety of reasons for that,but one of the reasons is that it symbolises
interest and attention.
So when you’re interested in something,your pupil grows.
And so Horus’s pupil is really big, andhe’s checking things out like mad.
So Horus is the eye, and he’s also a falcon.
And you might say, well why is he a falcon?
And the answer to that is falcons are birdsof prey, and they can really see.
So that’s another amplification of the ideaof the eye.
Now falcons fly up above everything, evenabove the pyramids.
And they can see wherever they want to see,and so Horus is the thing that flies up above
the structures of mankind, in some sense,and can see them panoramically.
So he’s not encapsulated in any particularpyramid, he’s the thing that’s above all
pyramids and looking and providing you withan overview.
And I think the best way to conceptualiseHorus in modern terms is attention.
That’s not thought, that’s a whole differentthing.
Like attention is what thought… attentionis the precursor to thought, in some sense.
Attention is where you meet meaning, and that’sanother way of thinking about it.
Attention is actually where you take undifferentiatedchaos and start to turn it into order.
And you think about… how much do you likebeing paid attention to?
People love that.
Children, you don’t pay attention to them,they become pathological.
You don’t pay attention to your partner,your relationship dissolves.
No one pays attention to you, you crawl offin a corner and die.
Advertisers pay for your attention.
Like attention, that’s a currency, man,that’s value.
And you like to be paid attention to whenyou do good things, and maybe you’ll even
do terrible things so that someone pays attentionto you.
Attention’s a big deal.
We don’t understand it very well.
But anyways, the Egyptians conceptualisedit as a god.
And that’s smart, that’s a very smartidea.
Anyways, Horus grows up in the Underworld,and then when he gets kind of big and ready
to contend with the world, he thinks I’mgoing to take the damn state back from my
evil uncle.
Well, that’s what you’re supposed to do.
You’re supposed to grow up, pay attention,get yourself the hell out of the Underworld,
and then take your state back from your eviluncle.
Okay, so what happens?
So Horus, he gets himself all prepared.
And he’s son of Order and Chaos, man, he’sno second-rate character.
You remember… how many of you have seenThe Avengers movies?
Okay.
Okay so I think it’s Samuel Jackson, right?
Samuel Jackson is often in the background,and if I remember correctly he’s kind of
like the mediator between these shadowy figuresthat sort of exist as…
I don’t know, they all look like middle-agedwhite men and they’re sort of like a power
group and they communicate on screen, I don’tknow exactly who they are.
But Jackson plays an intermediary.
But he is lacking an eye.
And part of the reason, you infer, that Jacksonis lacking an eye is because he’s had a
pretty long history of being involved in catastrophe.
And you know, one consequence of that is thathe’s become damaged.
Well, the same thing happens to Horus.
So Horus goes back and he says to Set, I seeyou for who you are.
I know what you’re up to.
You’re working for destruction.
You want to take the state apart.
There’s nothing positive about what you’redoing.
You facilitate deception.
So I’m taking the state back.
So they have a big fight.
And during the fight, Set tears out one ofHorus’s eyes.
Now that’s worth thinking about too, becausewhat it means (and this is exactly right)…
you know, one of the things Jung said aboutencountering malevolence.
It’s like, let’s say that you wanted tounderstand what the Nazis did.
And so you started to take it apart.
And at each little bit of exploration youtake it apart a little bit more deeply, and
then a little bit more deeply, and then alittle bit more deeply.
You want to get to the bottom of it.
Well you might ask yourself, well what’sat the bottom of terrible things?
Well the answer to that… an answer to that…is the archetype of evil.
And if you are to the degree that you encounterthat, even if you’re capable of god-like
attention, which is the case with Horus, theprobability is that that will be so devastating
that it will destroy half your consciousness.
That’s what happens to Horus.
And so that’s another thing I really likeabout the myths, man.
They don’t mess around.
You’re supposed to come out of the Underworld,you’re supposed to see what the hell’s
going on, you’re supposed to go back andtake the state away from its archaic institutions
and wilful blindness.
But if you really contend with that, you betterlook out, because you’re contending with
something that you can barely master.
Anyways, Horus beats Set, despite the factthat he has his eye torn out.
And so then he tell Set to go outside theboundaries of the Kingdom and to never come
back.
Well, why doesn’t he kill him?
Well he can’t, he’s a god.
You can’t get rid of Set.
Set is the deity of the decomposition of states.
That’s not going away.
The best you can do is hold it at bay forperiods of time.
And you have to be awake and aware of itsconstant presence.
Anyways, he chases Set away but he gets hiseye back.
And so he reclaims his consciousness frommalevolence, essentially.
And then you might think, okay, well whatshould he do?
He should slap that eye back in his head,and he’s defeated evil, so now he should
be king.
And that would be a good ending to the story,but that isn’t what the Egyptians do, and
this is where they really get brilliant, inmy estimation.
So Horus takes his eye, and he goes back tothe Underworld.
So he does this voluntarily.
He goes back to the Underworld.
And he goes back to where Osiris is existing,because it’s sort of the land of the dead.
And so Osiris has this weird existence.
He’s scattered all over Egypt, but his essence,I suppose, his spirit, is down there in the
Underworld, which is… it’s not exactlyhell.
Hell is a suburb of the Underworld.
Like it’s the worst neighbourhood of theUnderworld, that’s a good way of thinking
about it.
You guys go to the Underworld fairly often.
You may take a rare side-trip to hell, andyou probably regret it.
And we can talk about that means, becauseit actually has a very specific meaning.
Anyways, Osiris isn’t in hell, he’s justin the Underworld.
So he’s sitting there sort of, you know,inactive.
And in rough shape.
So Horus goes down to the Underworld, andhe finds Osiris, and he gives him an eye!
And so then Osiris can see again.
Remember, he couldn’t see, he was wilfullyblind, right?
And so that’s partly what led to his demise.
Horus give him this eye that’s been hardfought.
It’s the eye with which he encountered evil.
He gives Osiris that eye, perks him rightup.
And so then Horus and Osiris go back to thesurface world, and they unite to form the
ruler of Egypt.
And so the idea is that the proper ruler isobviously the thing that can pay attention
and conquer the pathology of the state andwilful blindness, but it’s more that.
It’s the thing that does that and then rejuvenatesthe state.
And you know, one of the things, I think thisis quite interesting… so the hippie culture
in the 1960s was a revolutionary culture,and you can make a case that during the 60s,
and the latter part of the 50s, young people’sattention was very much focused on certain
pathological elements of the state.
You know, the Civil Rights Movement seemedto be a real thing, there was a movement towards
emancipation of women, there were lots ofthings that I think you can look at from a
distance and say, you know, good work.
But then there was the other element of it,which was, well, you know, down with the state
and don’t trust anyone over 30.
Well, that’s kind of stupid, because firstof all it’s not that long till you’re
30 and then what do you do?
And second, well no, you can’t throw thedamn baby out with the bathwater.
I mean first of all, you’re probably doingthat because you don’t want to grow up,
ever.
You’re just Peter Pan.
And second, it’s like, you can’t leaveOsiris languishing in the Underworld.
You have to give him vision and bring himback up to the surface.
Because I don’t care how attentive you are,if you’re also not wise you’re not going
to be good for anything.
And the wisdom is partly the integration ofthe best your culture has to offer you into
your character, so that you can be an avatarof culture, an attentive avatar of culture.
And then you’re a well-balanced soul.
Well, so the Egyptians figured all this out.
And then it’s even cooler than that, becausethey used this idea of the union of Horus
and Osiris as their conceptual representationof what gave the Pharaoh sovereignty.
Because again, like the Mesopotamians, theywere trying to figure out, well what should
rule?
What should be above all?
And the Mesopotamians figured, well it’ssomething like Marduk, he’s got lots of
eyes, he can talk, he’s brave, he’ll conquerthe unknown.
As a consequence, he makes a pretty good topgod.
And the Egyptians added a level of sophisticationto that, because Horus is not only the thing
that will go into the Underworld, he goesinto the Underworld and he rescues things
of tremendous value and then unites with them,so that not only can he see, but he’s wise.
And so then that’s what the Pharaoh is supposedto be.
And the Egyptians basically characterisedthat union as something akin to the immortal
soul.
Now, Eliade tracks this development, he calledit the ‘democratisation of Osiris’.
So first of all, basically only the Pharaohwas allowed to be the Horus-Osiris union in
some sense.
And so in a way he was God on Earth, you know,which is a conception of course that has lasted
into cultures for a very, very long periodof time.
And the Japanese still thought that way abouttheir emperor until the end of World War II.
Many of them still think that way.
So he was the embodiment of divine sovereignty.
It was in the leader only.
But as the Egyptian state developed, the ideathat that soul was an attribute started to
descend down the power hierarchy.
So after a while the aristocracy started touse it.
And then, and this is a radical oversimplification,but it’ll do for the purposes of this discussion,
you know by the time the Jews came along,and they came out of Egypt (mythologically
speaking), the idea that there could be aunion or a relationship between something
that was divine and something that was individualwas distributed a long ways down the power
hierarchy.
And then by the time the Greeks showed up,well in some sense it was all males, at least
all males who were part of the polity.
And when the Christians emerged, it was everyone.
Prostitutes, tax collectors, thieves, murderers,everyone.
And so the idea of sovereignty started tobecome, you know first of all it was a mythological
attribute, it was identified with the ruler,but then it became a psychological attribute
that was distributed across the entire population.
It’s brilliant.
It’s brilliant!
And as far as I can tell, those conceptualisationsformed the sub-structure of our belief that
each person is divinely valuable, in theirown right.
That they have inalienable rights, even ifyou’re a murderer, right, the state is very
restricted in what it can do to you.
Even if you committed a terrible crime, evenif you admit to it, the state is still very
restricted in what it’s allowed to do toyou.
Because there’s an idea that there’s somethingabout you that has the quality of transcendent
value.
That’s exactly it.
And well, we know some of the attributes.
One of them is you can see and pay attentionand another is that you can speak and communicate.
You know, the other is that you can becomewise, that you can approach things that frighten
you with courage, and generate new informationas a consequence.
Like there’s lots of things about you thatthe relationship between Chaos and Order actually
literally depend upon.
And so the state has come to respect the individualpartly because the individual is, by necessity,
the thing that rejuvenates the state.
And so there’s this dynamic relationshipbetween the two.
The state structures you, but it’s old andit’s blind, and there’s lots of things
it can’t see, and it’s partly corrupt.
Okay, but it’s hell of a lot better thannothing, generally speaking, and so then you’re
like the forerunner of the state, and youcan pay attention.
Maybe you can see where things aren’t workingexactly right, where they’re not working
properly, and fix them.
And so then the state maintains its protectivestructure across time and you exist in a dialectical
relationship with it.
You know, you see by the time the Christianhero mythology emerges, Christ is more the
reconstructor of the state than he is thething that encounters chaos, right?
Because a huge chunk of the Christian storyis about the antagonism between him and his
culture and the Roman culture as well.
So the whole existential drama actually shiftsfrom hero as buttressing against nature, which
of course would have been the case earlier,to hero as thing that decomposes and reconstructs
culture in a radical way.
So you know, Moses does the same thing, andMoses is a master of water, he’s a transformative
agent, so it’s an indication of exactlythe same sort of idea.
That’s a good time for a break.