Now one of the things that people are verymuch confused by in the modern world is what
archaic people meant by gods, and that’sbecause whatever the deities were that had
the motive force that archaic people attributedto the gods seemed to have disappeared in
modern culture. Now the Jungian in hypothesisis that’s because they turned into psychological
traits, fundamentally, or motivational forces,so what the, what archaic societies would
describe as gods, we would describe as motivationalforces,
so, for example, Venus is a goddess, the goddessof love, and we would associate her power
with love and sex fundamentally, and the reasonthat that’s a reasonable association from
the archaic standpoint is because the motivequality that makes up what Venus represents
is transpersonal, which means it’s not limitedto one person and it’s immortal in that
the motive force that characterizes sexualaffiliation exists whether or not a single
individual exists.so it’s transpersonal, has the force of
a personality , because, if you fall in love,you’re motivated by a certain set of standards
and perspectives, right, if you’re grippedby beauty, say, or if you’re gripped by
lust, that imposes a particular view of theworld on you and impels your actions, sometimes
despite your will, and so that would be equivalent,from the archaic perspective, to possession.
And it’s clearly the case that archaic societieswho are engaged in warfare, for example, would
conduct rituals to ensure that the warriorsthat made up their societies were, in fact,
possessed by the correct god, so it mightbe Mars, for example, the Roman God of War,
so that on the battlefield they exhibitedthe proper characteristics of somebody who
was in a battle, right, rage you can think,rage, so possession by the God of War would
be equivalent to this possession by a stateof rage
Now, it’s not quite that simple, it isn’tonly that archaic people externalized motive
forces and gave them the status of deities,what they did was more complex than that,
and I think you can understand that a littlebit better if you start to, if you start to
give some, uh, thought to the modern behavioralnotion of the stimulus.
Now the stimulus is a very, very weird concept,because the behaviourists who were interested
in taking apart what was inside the brainwould attribute motive force to the stimulus,
right, they’d say, if you present an animalwith a stimulus, he will therefor act, and
that meant that the behaviours were makingthe presupposition that the motive power resided
in some manner in the stimulus. Well and why,why would they think like that?
Well, it’s an archaic mode of thought ina sense. You can imagine a child saying, um,
one of my friends today made me really angry,right, which means that the child is essentially
conflating his or her own internal emotionalstate with the proximal stimulus that gave
rise to that state, and you see complex associationslike that taking place with regards to the
apprehension of beauty, say, because beautyis a very, very complex and difficult to localize
phenomena; if you’re very attracted to someone,are you attracted by them? Well in a sense,
of course, you are, because there they are,but in another sense you’re not at all because
what’s happening is that you’re engagedas much in the in attraction as anything that’s
motivating you from the outside world, andI think that partly accounts for your sense
of foolishness, especially if the person thatyou’re attracted to doesn’t return your
attraction,
I mean, you, you know that from your perceptualperspective you’re attracted and dominated
by the object, but, uh, by the same token,you know entirely that, easy as it is to presume
it’s them and their fault, say, pretty muchit all has to do with you, so in the modern
world where we’ve been able to separateout the object and the motive force of the
object, the deities have sort of moved insideof us and become psychological forces, but
you can understand if you think about it inthis manner that things weren’t so clear
prior to the dawn of the empirical age,
that gives you a little bit of backgroundwith regards to what the notion of deity meant
to archaic societies who still utilize thosenotions as explanatory terms. Okay, so we
know that if you’re caught up in one ofthese little, uh, world games, that you may
be motivated by something very, very fundamental,right, a, a tendency that transcends you the
tendency to propagate yourself, say, Freud’sfundamental motivational level, sexual affiliation
or the tendency to maintain yourself, thoseyou could say are the fundamental gods of
existence, the fundamental driving forces,and it’s there, it’s the interaction of
those two forces over great periods of timethat produce the great diversity of life and,
and human life, that we see before us, andeach of those fundamental, most fundamental
of gods, have their differentiated minionso to speak so that while engaged in the meta
goal of self preservation, you act out plotsof hunger and plots of thirst and you move
from cold to hot or from hot to cold dependingon your particular, uh, on your particular,
on the particular temperature of your surroundingsor with regards to self propagation.
You’re attracted to people or are repelledby them for reasons that are frequently absolutely
beyond your comprehension by the way, so Ijust found out this week, uh, and this is
absolutely staggering, I think, that if you,um, if you run an experiment on a group of
women and you track their menstrual cycle,and then you give them t-shirts that men have
worn to smell, that women who are ovulatinglike the smell of symmetrical men better than
A-symmetrical men, so and that’s partlybecause symmetrical men are probably more
healthy, but this is a good example of howthe motive forces that configure your world
are dependent on instinctual forces that arenot only beyond your consciousness, but they’re
beyond even, at the moment, any of our, uh,explicit explanations.
So, uh, another finding that’s very similarthat I came across recently, it turns out
that mice will not mate with mice that haveRH blood factors that are likely to produce,
um, unfit offspring, uh, the more closelygenetically related the RH factors, the more
likely there is to be a, a, an, a catastrophewith regards to offspring, and the mice seem
to detect the RH factor by smell so recentlythis was run by, with women, and it is also
the case that women prefer men whose RH factorsare at an optimal distance from them in terms
of smell, so this is some example of how theseunbelievably archaic systems, ‘cause like
the old factory systems are unbelievably archaic,produce alterations in world view at a level
that’s massively below consciousness, sounderneath your cortical shell, which is tonically
inhibiting all your emotional and motivationalsystems, lies all these motivational and emotional
systems, and they have branches that growup into the cortex, and they have the capacity
to control your behaviour completely and voluntarily,so, for example, if you’re gripped by fear,
if you’re gripped by fear, it’s very,very difficult to overcome that voluntarily,
and at least initially you won’t be ableto, which is to say that when the chips are
down, the underlying motivational and emotionalsystems have control. Okay. So then what happens
from that perspective, then what happens whenyou encounter something you don’t understand,
and I think the best way to explain it issomething like generalize disinhibition, which
is that all your underlying motivational andemotional systems are more or less disinhibited
simultaneously, and the reason for that isbecause you want to be maximally prepared
to do whatever the hell is necessary to dowhen you are somewhere that you don’t understand,
and because you don’t know what that thingis going to be, all your systems go on, and
when psychologists talk about stress, whichis an abysmal word, right, it means everything
and nothing, when psychologists talk aboutstress, what they mean is, generalized disinhibition
of emotion and motivation
so then you come to the case of ancient EgyptAnd one of the things Eliade points out, which
I think is really interesting, I mean reallyphenomenal, the story I’m going to tell
you right now was essentially revealed inEgyptian culture at the dawn of the culture
rather than developing over the course ofthe culture. So the Egyptians had a revelation,
right, immediately that the most fundamentalof gods was the one who created as a consequence
of his tongue and his speech, very much akinto the Sumerian idea with regards to Marduk
and also to later Judao-Christian ideas.
so here’s the story. There’s four playersin this drama, OK? There’s Osiris, his wife
Isis, Horace their son, and Seth. And Sethis Osiris’ evil brother, OK? Now Osiris
was a remarkable guy. He was the founder ofthe Egyptian state from the mythological perspective,
so kind of like Romulus and Remus for Rome,a myth or like George Washington for the U.S.,
right? A mythologized figure who representedall of the Pharaohs and people for that matter
who’d actually constructed the Egyptianstate.
Osiris, father of Egypt, so to speak, butOsiris is kind of old and a little archaic
and maybe a little bit senile and even possiblya little bit naïve in that you know even
no matter how great you were in your youth,as time goes on you lose contact with environmental
transformations and the old rules that youlived by are not necessarily applicable to
the present and some of those things thatyou ignore become paramount in importance.
And it turns out that Osiris has an evil brother,Seth, and Seth eventually turns into Satan
as mythology develops through the centuries.And Seth is a nasty guy, right, I mean what
he wants more than anything is undeserveddominion over the Egyptian state. Now Osiris,
because he’s not paying attention and becausehe isn’t sufficiently cognizant anymore
of the power of evil, more or less ignoreshis evil brother, who in turn chops him into
pieces and then distributes his pieces allover the Egyptian state. Now you might say:
why didn’t he just kill him, right? I meanyou’d think chopping him up would kill him
but he’s a god, you can’t just kill them.The reason in mythology, and you see this
in movies as well, where the villain neverquite dies or the hero never quite dies, is
because even if you eliminate individual embodimentsof what those figures represent, new embodiments
manifest themselves virtually immediately.So one of the things mythology is quite clear
about is that you never win a final battlewith evil. It’s a permanent property of
the world.
So anyways, Seth hacks up Osiris, spreadshim all over the land. Osiris ends up living
a kind of shadowy and nebulous ghost-likeexistence down in the underworld and Seth
becomes the ruler of the state. A nasty story.Alright, but Osiris has Isis as a wife. Now
Isis had a huge cult. She was a powerful goddess,goddess of the under world, a kind of combination
of Kali and Diana, so to speak, capable oftremendous destructive power but also the
source of all good things – something verymuch like Tiamat. Now Isis got wind of her
husband’s disintegration, so to speak, andshe went searching around Egypt till she found
his phallus and with it she makes herselfpregnant.
OK, so what does that mean exactly? It meanssomething like this. The collapse of any great
order brings with it new potential and I thinkthis is something that capitalism has way
over forms of government like communism. Capitalismhas mechanisms in place to allow large structures
that are no longer meeting their functionto collapse. But frequently when they collapse,
it’s not like they disintegrate into dust,right, they disintegrate into sub-components,
so to speak, many of which then come to termswith the fact that the order has collapsed
and build something new. So you can’t getrid of culture so easily. You can hack it
up into bits, you can disembody it, so tospeak, you can spread it all over the state,
you can introduce chaos into it. But that’ssomething that has the potential of new birth
like the phoenix rising from the ashes.So anyways, Isis, who’s the matrix, who’s
Tiamat, gets Osiris’ phallus, which is thecontainer of the germ of culture, right, the
phenomenon that’s capable of the seminalidea, and she makes herself pregnant and she
gives birth to Horace, who’s the long-lostson of the rightful king, right, a very typical
mythological motif. OK, so Horace is alienatedfrom the kingdom, which is another very common
mythological motif, you know like how KingArthur, for example, is raised by commoners?
The same story pops up in the story for Christ,for example, because Christ has heavenly parents
but then he also has kind of ordinary parentsand it’s a very common motif. Anyways, so
Horace grows up outside of the classical structureof the Egyptian state, which is tilted terribly
towards evil because Seth has dominated, becauseOsiris was too blind to his evil brother to
take appropriate defensive actions, and hegrows to maturity. And then he decides, like
all rightful sons of the long-lost king, toreclaim his heritage. So he goes back to Egypt,
right, and he has this vicious battle withSeth and in the process, Seth tears out one
of his eyes. Well, fine, and that’s an indicationof just exactly how devastating a battle with
the forces of evil, so to speak, preciselyare. They represent a critical threat to the
integrity of consciousness, right? That’swhy he loses an eye. Well, luckily enough,
Horace has got his act together and he doesdefeat Seth and he banishes him and he gets
the eye back. And then you think: OK, great,pop the eye back in, become emperor, everything’s
fine
Now let’s backtrack a little bit and thinkabout this politically. Now the Egyptians
had this really weird idea. They had the ideathat the living pharaoh was the living pharaoh
and the dead pharaoh at the same time. makesno sense rationally but it makes a lot of
sense from a narrative perspective becausewhat they were saying is something like this:
look, you got to think that when you becomeking, or when you become president, or when
you take on a role of that absolute magnitude,that then you’re partly you but you’re
also partly this role and there’s reallyno way out of that, right? And the role is
composed of the unbelievable weight of thecultural tradition that you’re representing.
And you can say: well, that’s true for beingking or for being president but it’s also
true if you become a doctor or a lawyer, anysort of specialized occupation. It’s partly
you, because you’re embodying the role,but it’s partly the role too. So the pharaoh
is the live pharaoh and the dead pharaoh becausethe dead pharaoh represents culture, right?
The king is dead, long live the king.
OK, but paralleling that idea was the ideathat the pharaoh was not only the dead pharaoh
and the live pharaoh at the same time butthat he was Osiris and Horace at the same
time. But then you think in the story, Horacehas taken over Seth, he’s got his eye back,
he can be king. But he isn’t king yet andthis is where the Egyptians really get their
act together and I think, of the two storiesthat I’m telling you, this is the one that
has the most significance, I think, for modernpeople because we’re so likely to sidestep
our obligation to our culture, whatever thathappens to be. So instead of popping this
eye back in his head, which is the first thingyou’d think he does, he decides he’s going
to go back to the underworld, where Osirisis living in this ghostlike and dead manner,
since he’s been chopped up by Seth. So hegoes down into the underworld, which is no
piece of cake, and he finds Osiris there inthis kind of half-dead state and he gives
him his eye. And that enlightens Osiris, right,it gives him vision and so then he takes Osiris
back to Egypt arm in arm, so to speak. Andit’s the conjunction of Osiris and Horace
that constitutes the basis for Egyptian sovereigntyand that is bloody brilliant, right, because
the Egyptians figured out that so Horace isMarduk, for all intents and purposes, right?
He’s this avenging hero. In the Egyptianstory, he fights political corruption rather
than chaos but you can understand that thoseare two flipsides of the hero archetype, they
are.
The hero archetype has two basic elements.One is the confrontation of the terrible aspect
of nature, chaos in its most brutal form,and the other is the confrontation with the
archaic aspect of culture. And in some ways,those aren’t distinguishable because if
culture isn’t archaic, chaos never makesitself present. So which is to say you can’t
separate out political degradation from environmentaldegradation, say, it’s the same idea.
So anyways, Horace has this great idea. Heneeds his father, right, and I told you about
the same motif emerging in Pinocchio, we alreadylooked at that, right? Pinocchio doesn’t
become genuine until he risks his life savinghis father, alright, so the same thing is
happening in this particular situation. Sothat’s pretty cool. So then you get the
situation where the Egyptians characterizesovereignty as the capability to overcome
evil in the political domain, combined with– and that’s a youthful capability, right
– combined with the wisdom of the past,alright? Then you look at that from a political
perspective and you find out already thatthe Egyptians viewed the pharaoh as the live
pharaoh and the dead pharaoh simultaneously.
But then you find out something else that’sinteresting and it gives you some real insight
into just exactly how bloody powerful theseideas were. So you think: what did the Egyptians
do with their spare time? And then you think:well, they built the pyramids, right, I mean
and that was no trivial undertaking. It wassort of the 5000 B.C. equivalent of flying
to Mars. And I mean the pyramids are prettyimpressive now but they were a hell of a lot
more impressive in their original form becausethey were in the middle of an immense complex.
And the pyramids were dedicated to the immortalityof the pharaoh and the pharaoh was possessed
by a spirit called Ka and Ka was his immortalspirit and it was the union of Horace and
Osiris, OK?
So Egyptian society was dedicated to deifyingthe immortal spirit of the pharaoh, the union
of Horace and Osiris. And it was the unionthat gave the, it was this identification
with this union that gave the pharaoh a phenomenonthe Egyptians called Maat and Maat was like
truth or good order. And you could think aboutit as conscience in a sense is if the pharaoh
was utilizing the union of Horace and Osiris,then he would have an intuitive ability to
decide what the appropriate course of orderwas. And so the Egyptians would say, for example,
when the pharaoh came into the court, they’dsay: the sun has risen by that they meant
the power that reigned over the dominion ofthe night had arrived. They conceptualized
maat as the capacity to put order in the placeof chaos, essentially formally. So they assimilated
the union of Horace and Osiris with the capabilityof putting order in the face of chaos. They
regarded that as immortal and they spent allof the excess resources of their society glorifying
that idea. And you think: you don’t producesomething like the pyramids without really
being possessed by an idea, right? This isno trivial undertaking, it’s going over
a period of several hundred, if not severalthousand, years. That takes an awful lot of
work. So this idea of the immortality of theunion of Horace and Osiris and its association
with sovereignty was an absolutely potentidea for the Egyptians. It gave their whole
culture motive force.
OK, so the Egyptians thought: the pharaohis immortal and that’s the reason why and
we more or less partake in his immortalityby being his subjects. So that was a pretty
good deal. But then Eliade points out somethingvery interesting and this is called the democratization
of Osiris and what you found was that initiallythere were certain symbolic presentations
representing the immortality of the pharaohthat could only be used by the pharaoh. But
as Egyptian culture continued to develop,then the symbolic representations of immortality
started to be adopted by the aristocracy.Now what did that mean? It meant that this
process that the Egyptians had conceptualizedas integral to the order of the state was
no longer solely embodied in the hands ofthe pharaoh, right? It had started to drift
down the power hierarchy into the aristocracy,OK? Well then you think: what happens after
that? So by the end of Egyptian society, thearistocrats were characterized by an identity
with the union of Horace and Osiris, right?Sovereignty had started to spread itself out.
And you think: what starts to happen withthe Greeks, right? The Greeks attribute sovereignty
to every male Greek. Barbarians, no. Women,no. But at least all males, right? You get
a beginning of a democratic notion there.
The Jews developing ideas that, if not derivedfrom Egypt, were at least similar in structure
to Egyptian ideas, say: not the aristocracy,not the pharaoh but every individual has the
capacity of establishing a direct relationshipwith the transcendent deity, right? Then you
have a Christian revolution that follows thatwhere the idea that sovereignty inheres in
the individual, is distributed to everyone,right, everyone – male, female, criminal,
non-criminal, murderer, rapist, taxman, youname it, sovereignty inheres within them.
And it’s on that soil that our whole democraticculture emerges – these unbelievably archaic
ideas, first acted out, right, first embodiedin ritual, first dramatized then only told
as stories, developing more and more coherenceover stretches of time of thousands of years,
not hundreds of years but thousands of years,becoming more coherent, becoming more pointed,
becoming more relevant with regards to theirembodiment, then starting to become understood
explicitly and distributed to the entire society.
And it’s on that ground that our world rests,not on the ground of rationality, as established
in say Europe in 1500. What we have is muchmore profound and solid and deep than any
mere rational construction. It’s a fromof government, an equilibrated state, so to
speak, that’s a consequence of an emergent,if not evolutionary, at least social evolutionary
process. And I would say that it stems muchfarther back than that because you can imagine
something like this. Look, if this ideal personalitythat should be sovereign is represented by
the optimal combination of creativity andtraditionalism, say, if that’s the optimal
combination, and if we’re prepared to regardthat as optimal, if that’s a – if that’s
what you perceive when you perceive someonethat you respect and admire, then you could
say that success in our social hierarchiesis predicated on the degree to which you actually
embody that combination. And then you seean interaction between individual success
and the social construction that would bean interaction that extends over centuries
or even thousands of centuries so that asthese ideas become more and more developed,
we become more and more adapted to embodyingthem as a consequence of evolutionary pressure.
So it’s not just cultural, it’s also biological.
So our political presuppositions rest on acultural basis which is unbelievably archaic,
resting in turn on something even lower thanthat. And I think examples of that are those
that I’ve provided you with already. Weknow, for example, that chimps who have to
live in a dominance hierarchy are very aggressive,especially the males, but they’re also very
cooperative. So the males who are aggressivespend a substantial amount of time repairing
social boundaries in the aftermath of an aggressiveincident because they’re just as concerned
with keeping the bloody hierarchy intact asthey are in climbing it. They have to be.
And we know that even wolves won’t killa subordinate wolf once they’ve defeated
it. They allow the subordinate wolf to maintainits own existence, right, they have this notion,
this procedural notion that – even thoseentities that appear insignificant may, in
some manner that’s beyond speech, stillcontribute to the integrity of the whole.
And that’s an idea that’s very much similarto our notion that sovereignty inheres in
the individual, right? We’ve taken it further.No matter what you do, even if you’re in
clear violation of the law, your rights remainintact because no matter how outcast you are
and how apparently beyond redemption, yourexistence may still contribute something to
the integrity of the whole. And as far asI’m concerned, that doesn’t appear to
be a metaphorical idea. If you dismiss it,you cannot dismiss it without simultaneously
dismissing the ground on which our statesrest. And so then you have to ask yourself:
are you willing to do that? And if the answeris no, well then you have to start to question
what it is that you actually believe, becauseif you buy the doctrine of natural rights,
which you do, you act it out, then all ofthis follows in its wake, or it rests on sand.
And it bloody well better not rest on sand.