Guess the first thing I'd like to just ask you is how are you doing?
I'm doing great. So what what's great about what what you're doing? What's so good about your life?
Well right now I'm in the process of putting together my next stand-up comedy special
So I'm at the process now where I've actually put together a full new hour of material
since my Netflix special which came out in October so
That's that's great for me. It's that's always a
a relaxing moment because it's very difficult to put that hour together.
And so it's and so how do you go about doing that?
A lot of writing a lot of performing a lot of reading a lot of going over notes a lot of
examining material a lot of reviewing
Sets and trying to find out what I like and what I don't like it's a long and brutal process system
It's the most fun but also the most difficult part of stand-up is the creation of new material
So how many hours do you think you put in of work to do an hour's worth stand-up?
Any idea?
That's a really good question
It's usually about I can do I can create a solid ten minutes a month. That's usually what it is
So it takes me six months to do an hour and in that six months on an average week I'll do
Eight or nine sets so that's eight or nine
either half-hour or hours of material
Sometimes 15 minutes usually an hour depending upon where I'm working and how many other people are on the show
And then a lot of time writing
So you're doing those sets in front of live audiences all the time? Yes.
Yeah, you have to. Let's, that's the weird thing about stand-up comedy
It seems to be that it's it's not something that you can do in a vacuum
It has to actually be done. It actually it has to come alive in front of the audience
Like I can I can write in a vacuum,
I can write alone, I can, uh
contemplate, go over my material, review,
edit, I could all sorts of things by myself, but it really doesn't come alive until it's in front of an audience
Yeah, well, I guess it's not so easy to figure out what's funny
You kind of hope that people will laugh
yeah, it's that, but it's also there's a state of mind that you only really achieve when you're performing in front of an audience and
You can try to recreate it, but it'll be fake if you try to do it on your own
I don't write I don't write in joke form, like I don't write the way I say it on stage
I write in sort of a conceptual form.
I write in an essay form and then I sort of extract things that I think are funny out of that, but they really only
find their true the true way I'm going to do them
I only find that in front of an audience because it's like when the when I'm in front of an audience
Then it becomes clear to me how I should and shouldn't say things based in part on how they're reacting
And based in part on how I feel
when I'm performing the idea
Like I find where the the fat of the bit is, and that's where you kind of
appreciate economy of words and you know what to edit out, and
what to elaborate on, what people aren't totally
understanding, and what maybe is
over-explained, and all that stuff kind of comes together in front of an audience
So the essays that you're writing or the writing that you're doing like are they on serious topics? Are they on things you're thinking about
philosophically or are you trying specifically to be funny or you just trying to get some thoughts down?
You know about the way you're thinking about the world?
Both
you know, it's like the ideas
if, it's
See I would say that stand-up comedy, at least the way I do it, it comes in three forms
Like there's three steps. In the beginning, you're really just trying to get laughs, you're fighting for survival out there. You're scared
That's in the early days of your career. Then you start doing what you think is funny, like things that would make you laugh
But then in stage three
you start
trying to make ideas funny and you try to
cleverly introduce ideas into people's heads that maybe they wouldn't
entertain without the humor aspect of it. And so when I write, if I write on a subject, whatever the subject might be,
I write without thinking oh, I have to make each word funny or I have to make each sentence funny
I write just what are my thoughts on this subject and then along the way I find
irony and I find
ridiculous
perceptions and all the things that lead to stand-up comedy material
Right, and how
and I extract those
Right, and how much of their like humor and the whip just occurs to you spontaneously on the stage?
Sometimes a lot. It depends on the subject
But it's always a possibility, some of the best lines that I've ever come up with
in my act to come up with, I come up with on the spot while I'm just talking about things
Right, well that should be when you're like into the subject and things are going well with the audience
Yeah, yeah, that's basically how it goes
It's a tricky business
yeah, it sounds like an extremely tricky business and one way the cost of failure is, is
humiliation and and and, uh
emotional pain
Yeah, it's the worst
There's not that many things that are more embarrassing than like trying to be funny
Especially if you've put say a hundred hours into one hour of preparation
Which is less than you're doing and then finding out that you're just not that amusing
That doesn't sound
It's more common than not
Yeah, yeah, yeah
So how many Netflix specials have you done now?
I've done three and
I'm working on my fourth one right now, but overall I've done nine
different hours of comedy either a comedy album or video special
Yeah
What's it been like working for Netflix?
It's great. They're very easy.
Oh that's good
Yeah, they they don't they really don't have any notes. They just let me
You know, fortunately
I got to them at a stage in my career where I was already
advanced and I was already a headliner and I've been doing stand-up comedy for decades
So it was it was good in that sense that I was well prepared
but they you know they
when we first signed this initial deal, they were really just wanting me to do what I do best
Right
So they liked it and it's easy. There's no, there is really
relatively little input, almost none
Right, so they're not willing to mess with success fundamentally
Yeah, they like what I do. So they're just like 'go ahead'
they know that my goal is to do my best
I'm not trying to, I mean, there are comedians that will release
material just for the money
they'll try to capitalize on their fame and put something out but sloppy and
I feel like, for me at least, that's that's not an option and that would taint my legacy and taint my
my body of work. I'm not interested in doing that.
Right, right. Yeah well, I've seen your Netflix specials and they're pretty damn funny
Thank you
and that that's that that that ver- that, uh
little skit you did on the Kardashians
that was a killer, man
Thank you. That took forever to work out
I bet
to figure out a way to make fun of that guy
or girl
Oh God, it was it was ridiculous. You make an extremely intense,
demonic, gargoyle
You've very good sense of humor
you know, so that was killing me
I thought, Jesus he's not going to go there is he?
Oh, yeah, yeah, he is
Oh he's going to go for it
Yeah
It's good to see that kind of like horrific courage manifest itself on stage
You really like that in a comedian, you know
And you see them get going and
I used to see this with Sarah Silverman. You could see her eyes sort of flash and she'd think,
Oh I shouldn't say that. Nah, there's no way
Then she'd say it, and you'd think
Yup
oh, no one should have said that but man, it was deadly
Yeah, I think out of all the women doing comedy right now, she's probably the best at that
You know?
She can come up with some-
She's the best at pushing that envelope
Yeah that's, that's for sure. She's got, there's some very dark recesses in that woman's mind
Yeah. Yeah
Okay so the Netflix thing is going well
do you, do you enjoy, do you enjoy doing that?
Yes. Yeah, I enjoy it
What do you like about it?
The danger of it, the the difficulty, the challenge that
one, it's done and people enjoy it that I'm legitimately affecting people. I love, I love that
when people though get a chance to sit down and watch it for an hour and it'll make them feel better
They'll laugh, they they, it takes them out of the dreary,
dullness of their day, or the agony of whatever they're going through in their life
And they can escape that for an hour, and
Yeah, thank God for comedy, man
It's just abo-, it's just in the same domain as music for necessity.
Yeah, I agree. It's, it affects people
You know there are campus now, where there's like, no sarcasm rule, say
Oh, that's hilarious
God, could you imagine?
Id, I'd last like 50 seconds
It's like, yeah, is sarcasm considered a micro-aggression? Is that what it is?
Yes, definitely. Yeah
Unless it's real sarcasm,
in which case it's a macro-aggression
I just keep thinking that in time, this is going to be one of the most hysterical
uh, periods of time that people look back on, periods of history
like, you know, when we look at guys with powdered wigs, and you know, preposterous behavior from the past
and we go, God what were they thinking?
I really think we're going to do the same thing about today. I think
Well I hope so.
One of the most-, I think for sure
I hope so
That means that will be more sane when we're looking back
or at least we'll be
insane in a different way, and I'm pretty much ready for a different form of insane personally
well, I think the insane that you're getting
is so
It's so pronounced and it's so much more intense that
it has
It's less effective
and then the reaction to it, it's
more popular, the negative reaction, to a lot of this insane rhetoric and it's insane behavior
It's more popular now
to understand how ridiculous some of these people are
You know, when you see like what antifa is doing in Portland
blocking traffic and you know the telling people where to go what to do and beating people up that don't comply and
Saying that you're a white supremacist, if you don't listen to them and like this this all this stuff is so ridiculous
It's so over the top and they keep feeding on themselves
they keep attacking people that are not progressive enough, they keep
literally eating their own, and it it, for the, from the outside, from the
perspective of people that don't share their ideology
It looks more and more ridiculous and that makes them more and more
frenzied, and it ramps it all up, and I think it's ultimately going to crash
It's just like, what kind of damage is it gonna do the landscape as it's crashing?
Right, right
Well, that's that's the thing that you know, hopefully can be mitigated so that the landing isn't too hard
Yeah
So I thought, look, every time we've talked we've talked a lot about me and
Like I'm quite sick of talking about me actually and probably have been for like a year or maybe even longer
so I thought that it would be really good to talk about you and
I'm curious about you because you're such a strange character. And so
Um
You know, in the in the most interesting of ways
and so I thought I'd like start at the beginning. So, I don't know that much about you. So, um
Where'd you grow up?
Well, I grew up in a lot of places. I was born in New Jersey, um, I lived there until I was seven. My mother
split up from my dad and married my stepdad
We moved to California
with lived in San Francisco from age 7 to 11
Then I lived in Florida. He was going to the University of Florida at Gainesville
lived there from age 11 to right around 13, then we moved to Boston and I lived in Boston for
The next
I guess the next 10 years, and that's really where I grew up, I grew up basically
when I when I think of where I come from, I think of Boston. It's also the place where I started doing stand-up comedy
which means a lot to me. It's also where I started fighting
It's where I started doing martial arts
All the significant things that happened in my life happened in Boston
in my developmental period
and so you moved to Boston, when you were how old?
13
13, I see. Yeah. Right, right.
And then you were there for how many years?
11, 11 years.
Oh, yeah, so that's a long time. Yeah, where'd you live in Boston?
Newton. Newton upper falls, it's a suburb of Boston
Yeah. Yeah, nice and New England ay
Yeah, I love it out there
Yeah, me too
The people have a great sense of humor
it's, ah
like Toronto in a way, that you have to deal with that wicked winter and I think that develops character in people, I think that
Well it's funny, you know when I moved to Boston
cos I well I lived in Alberta in Montreal and Montreal is
bloody horrible in the winter and Alberta is even worse
and so I was I'd go down to Boston and
I went down there to interview first, and it was February and like, it was spring as far as I was concerned
I didn't even have a coat on and then when we lived there for years, you know
it was so funny we lived in this old house by a park and we'd get those Nor'easters blow in
you know with a
hurricane level winds and it bloody well snow three and a half feet and
I'd be thinking in my Canadian way that Jesus I better not go outside because I'll just
freeze to death the second I step outside but I'd go outside it was like
Well, I was 34 degrees or some damn thing. It's like I was expecting minus 40, you know, just horrible
So my Boston winters never, I mean apart from the snow which was you know deadly significant. They never really struck me as winter
They sort of struck me as,
well this is the sort of winter that you'd like to have if you wanted to
like a showy winter that people could be pleased with, rather than one you'd just sort of killed you
Yeah
Yeah, Canadians are on another level when it comes to winter
I have some pretty good friends that live in Alberta. And when I whenever I go up there it's like, whoa
Yeah, where do you, where do you go? Where do you go?
Um
They're outside of Edmonton, they're about, uh, two and a half hours north of Edmonton
Where?
Uh, I don't know the name of their town. It's where I go bear hunting.
A-ha
Um, that's, uh
Yeah, cos bear, you know, you might
One thing you notice about bear, is they have fur
See that's why they can live there
Humans
They don't have fur. So they can't actually live there. You have two to half hours north of Edmonton in the winter
Yeah, yeah. You see you go outside
It's rugged
Yeah you go outside in the wrong day and you're out there too long then you die
So
Yeah, or you run into a grizzly, which is also
That yes, there's also that those those those are those are nothing to contend
Those are nothing to take lightly man. When we used to go camping especially in British Columbia
grizzly bears were always a concern, because like a black bear if it chases you and first of all
It's only about third the size of a grizzly bear and it's still pretty big like it's a black bear
You know, it's not it's not like a house cat and if those things chase you and you and you play dead
They'll usually leave you alone. But if you
grizzly chases you and you play dead then it eats you and so and then of course if you fight back well
it also eats you, it just, maybe you get a hit-, a blow or two in, and probably not
so yeah, that was one
Well, the reason
of the terrors, camping there
Believe it or not, more
more people are, uh
preyed upon by black bears when a black bear attacks you it's usually because it's trying to eat you
When a grizzly bear attacks people it's usually either mistake or it was it was scared or it's really hungry
Yeah, the black bears tend to be like that too. A lot of them are old if they attack you.
Yes, yeah, yeah
They're getting, they're getting
so they can't catch a real animal. So they're, they'll settle for my gun, you know as an arctic monkey with no fat
Yeah, they get desperate
Yeah so okay so New Jersey, what do you remember about New Jersey?
Ah, boy, that's where I went to Catholic school which was a horror in and of itself, and
it's you know where my relatives lived and I just remember the the ethnic ethnic Italian environment and what that was like
You know with what it was like being around my relatives are out there, very Sopranos-like if you've ever watched the TV show
Oh yeah
That's that's really representative of a lot of New Jersey
you know, I don't remember too much other than that though
you know I was pretty little when we left
Do you still have relatives out there?
Um, I have one uncle, well two uncles, who still live there. That's it.
Do you ever see them?
I haven't seen them in years
Okay so New Jersey, mostly positive memories, do you think? Or just it's just I mean 7 and below that's pretty young. So
Well it was a tumultuous time period for me and my parents
We were, uh, always fighting and it just wasn't a good time
So when we escaped New Jersey, it was a relief
And that was also when your mum split up from your dad?
Yeah
And do you do do you still have, are you in contact with your dad?
No, I haven't spoken to him since I was 7 years old
Is he still alive?
He's still alive, and his name's Joe Rogan, which is even crazier
Ha
So you ever think about him?
No, no, not really
No, no, it's a long time ago. Well, that's,
Ha
Well, and do you remember what he was like to you?
He was nice to me
He just wasn't very nice to my mother
They had a very bad relationship
right
right
Okay, so you leave New Jersey and you go to California
Yeah, where'd you live there?
we lived in San Francisco and
that was an interesting time for me because it was during the Vietnam War
and it was sort of the height of the hippie movement - right - and my stepdad was a hippie
My father was a police officer in New Jersey
Oh, yeah
So I went from being around a cop who was a pretty brutal guy
To being around a long-haired hippie who was all about peace and love and was an architecture student, you know
It was a completely different sort of vibe
Yeah, sounds like a completely different sort of vibe
Yeah I was around a lot of gay folks, and around a lot of hippies
a lot of pot smokers
a lot of real open minded thinkers and weirdos around Haight Ashbury and that that sort of area
we lived near Lombard Street
It was real classic San Francisco in the 70s
70s so yeah, so yeah, let's see so you would have been you said seven
How
So wouldn't like 74 70 74 because I was seven years old right more than 57
Yeah, so you're five years. I see you're five years younger than me. So that yeah that places you there
So yeah, it was still pretty hippie central. Yeah, it was pretty it was pretty interesting
and then I went from there to
Florida which is like a total polar opposite, you know, that was the first time I'd ever heard anybody say the n-word was in
Florida and I didn't know what it meant. I had to ask my mother my mother got upset at me
She thought I knew what it meant. I was just playing games. I don't know what it means. Like tell me what it means
She said it's a bad word for black people and I was like, wow, really?
Uh-huh, because I was hearing it all the time. I
Never heard it in San Francisco and literally didn't hear it until I was 13 years old or excuse me
11 years old and so yeah, so where did he move to Ville in Florida? We moved to Gainesville
Which is where the University of Florida was where my stepdad was going?
to get a
He was he's studying architecture. And then we eventually moved to Boston so he could go to the Boston Architectural Center
That's why we wound up moving there. And is your mom and as your mom and your stepdads still together? Yep, still together. And yes
All the time. Yeah. They have a great relationship. It's really
Completely different they've been together forever. They they just they get along fantastic and in many ways that sort of modeled my
expectations for a real relationship, you know, like I saw the worst and then I saw a really great one and I'm like
Okay, I want that, you know
Yeah, that's a good choice. That's that shows some wisdom on your part. Pick up the second one rather than the first one
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. And is that worked out? Have you had good relationships? Oh, yeah. Yeah
I mean my wife's awesome again
You'd be married for how long almost ten years ten years and you have two girls or three?
I have three girls three girls, right young ones and one adult one
Right. I remember on this special that I was referring to that
You were bemoaning the fact that you were absolutely saturated in a feminine environment
Yeah, yeah. It's interesting man. It's interesting. But I think it balances me out. I think ultimately it's probably good for me. Yes
Ting now you wait till they hip teenagehood
Yeah be interesting. All right. Yeah for sure. Yeah
I actually enjoyed having teenagers, you know weirdly enough
I mean, we had a good rule in our house with our kids brought their friends over to our house a lot
and
It was funny because when they first came over when my teenagers friends came
They were always afraid of me but after gonna be in there, you know
Like getting to know the place a bit not staying there all the time, obviously
But getting a bit familiar with it, they ended up being a lot more afraid of my wife
Looked at dangerous on first impressions and she's kind of soft-spoken, but she's very
Unforgiving that might be one way of putting it and
Even we had a pretty good rule in our house with the teenage kids
Which is was it's a good one to know which was look we're really happy you're here, you know
But if you do something really stupid and we never ever have to see you again. That would actually be okay with us
And so the kids could have their friends over, you know naked have a reasonable
They could have a reasonable amount of fun or maybe even a slightly unreasonable amount of fun
but they couldn't have an overwhelmingly unreasonable amount of fun a
Great way to put it
Overwhelmingly unreasonable amount of fun is a great way to put it. Yeah. That was too much too much
We had a good drug policy too. I think
Which was that girl, I think it went well the rule was
Look I know perfectly. Well you're gonna experiment they were going to are an art school
You know, it's like I think I think that one of the majors part smoking and another one
irritation, like there was just no way they weren't going to experiment and my rule was um,
I better not be able to tell because you're being too much of a fool. So if you're gonna
You better handle it because otherwise you're pathetic
That seems to be pretty good well that's you know, cuz I thought I already thought it through you know
Because there's a there's a literature on
Experimentation among
adolescents both criminal experimentation
you know delinquency minor delinquency and that sort of thing a drug use and you get
Pathology at both ends the ones who are you know?
Smoking party everyday and take a drugs on a regular basis their outcomes not so good the ones who have stained
Completely and never experiment their outcome is also not so good. They tend to be on the dependent anxious end of the distribution
and so, you know you want your kids to
well
Play with the rules a little bit, but then I thought well what so ok, you got to play with the rules now
What are the rules about playing with the rules and one should be try not to be a bigger fool than necessary?
That's a good one. So you're not compromising yourself in the present, but the biggest the biggest issue
I think really and I think this is the fundamental rule for
Experimentation with adolescences you don't get to screw up your future
Hmm, right. Yeah, that's that's the killer
Well, would I worry about more than anything is opioids?
I worry about those
Because people are dying from them. Yeah, you know no one's dying from pot
It's very rare that anybody is doing something so stupid that they put their life in danger from pot or mushrooms
I'm worried about the ones that kill you, you know, I mean
I worry about pills more than anything that my children might possibly face, especially when I consider the fact that these
opiate manufacturers these opioid manufacturers
They keep making these damn things stronger and I don't understand it's not like oxycontin wasn't strong enough as it is
But now they have fentanyl another coming up with things are stronger than fentanyl. It's disgusting
Yeah
but weird arms for you say because I mean this is something that's really the
unexpected consequence of the of the illegal ization of drugs is that
now we've generated all these chemists who are really good at making tiny variations on every psychoactive substance known and now instead of like
10
Addictive substances, you can get yourself into serious trouble with there's 300
Yeah, there doesn't seem to be a big plus
No, it doesn't it's it's disturbing and it's disgusting and you know
They're finally starting to bring some of these guys to justice and they're arresting some of these people and bringing them to court
some of these manufacturers but they've been pushing this stuff down people's throats for years and
Advising doctor to subscribe them and it's a tough one man, like my when my daughter was sick
When she was a kid
She was in extreme
It's gotta be agony is the right word
You know for like two years about that because she was walking around on - girl - legs
you know her story a little bit and
The physician at SickKids which which was the person who was dealing with her arthritis would only prescribe her basically
uh, you know Anacin, you know, minor-league over-the-counter painkillers, which was like trying to kill a
grizzly bear with a flyswatter
It really wasn't right the right tool for the job and we found a family doctor who had enough courage to
prescribe her oxycontin
That was no joke, you know because for the first couple of weeks she was on oxycontin. It was really
odd and rough because it was like she was drunk and so that wasn't well that was weird socially to say the least and
also rather frightening but it did control her pain and we actually had the mix oxycontin with
Ritalin which is a strange combination, but a good one to know about because
oxycontin sedates and Ritalin stimulates
but the combination of the two are synergistic so they can really control pain and so her pain was
Controlled enough so that it didn't drive her insane
Over about a two-year period and then what she got her
Operations and that her had her legs fixed
She went off the opiates and she went through the whole withdrawal stick
You know, she had like night sweats and she had ants crawling under her skin and like it was pretty brutal
Although she she stopped cold turkey and never tried them again. She hated them. She said they just made her feel dead
And it's funny a lot of people, you know a lot you hear their horror stories that you know
if you try o pious once you're pretty much screwed because they're so wonderful, but lots of people don't like them, but there is a
Sizable minority of people, you know who really liked them
And and then there is the danger that you described of overdose and that's you know, that's that's a frightening thing
Hopefully you're getting smart enough to stay mostly away from pills
Yeah what I you know, you got to worry about the influence of their friends peer pressure
Yeah, yeah, definitely
well the terrible thing about teenagers, you know, is that
Everybody always says well, why do you succumb to peer pressure when you're a teenager and the answer is well?
That's why you're a teenager
You know you're getting away from your family and you're even getting away from your like elementary school best friend
And you're starting to join the broader social group and your job is to fit in
But not to fit in so much that there's nothing left of you, you know
But your job is to fit in to the tribe to the group but to learn them
And of course the downside is well, you're susceptible to peer pressure
But there's it's hard to distinguish that from actually being properly socialized. You know, the two things are very tightly aligned
All right. So so you were in Florida and you learned you learn some words that that
You didn't know and what was Florida like for you you were there only for a couple of hours
Yeah, Florida is a strange place man. I still have a
Love/hate relationship with Florida. It's the Land of the Lost. It's where people go to escape wherever they're from
Billy Corgan, who's a Billy Corbin? Who's a
Documentary director, he directed cocaine cowboys and a bunch of other great documentaries
he he lives down in Florida and every time he and I talk we just talk about how ridiculous Florida is and
it's
This place where people go to escape
They go to escape from the brutal cold of the Northeast winter or they go
Oh Jesus, my song is yeah. My phone is telling me that I'm running out of batteries
I'm gonna have to switch headsets and plug this in but it'd only take a second
Yeah, that should be fun. But I just think that
Florida is just like a uniquely stupid place. It's a weird place
You know, it's yeah, it's it's one of the things that's really struck me about the United States
It's really different than Canada for what that's worth
It's not like Americans really care why the United States is different to Canada apart for the fact that it is
It's like freezing cold six months of the years
There's a there's a lot of the us. It's like a movie set
You know so much of it is like it's manufactured to look like something else
In Florida is really like that
Yeah, and it it's it's a very strange place to visit
Because everything is not in the old towns, but the beach towns are like that lot that there's so there's some genuine old, Florida
But most of it is it's manufactured fate utopia for exactly the sort of people that you're describing
you know an
Unbearable or anything? I mean the weather's nice and the beach is nice and you know, there's worse places to live but
There's something about it. That's
Like a part of it. It's like a
Aha, that's a reef. It's not just well, obviously, it's like a resort but resorts have that sort of fake
utopian element to them that is
What it's like exactly kind of like a child fantasy or an adolescent fantasy something like that, you know, it's what you things want
If you don't yeah, I I always say that if you want to starve to death open up a bookstore in Miami
haha
Right like legitimately, this is no reading going on down there
it's just a strange place where people go to party and
This is this it's weird right now
I have to warn you that there is a beam of light shooting directly out of your head. No right here
Yeah, it's very impressive and I move this around. There we go. Yeah, that's
Plugin
Because the power was dying on my phone. I guess this video stuff sucks a lot of power
I guess I guess so I guess so. I mean I didn't
The light thing shooting out of your head, but you never know. You don't want to get any rumors on the Internet
Well, yeah you
Amongst all people know how easy that is. Hey
Hey, I haven't been in this scandal for a hold a whole week. Well this podcast is still young. Yeah
Something that will cause trouble
you are
all the people that I'm friends with you are probably the most
misrepresented friend that I have and I
defend you quite often and I
Don't get where people are coming from with you
I don't understand their inability to listen to your words and instead they try to generalize and
formulate these distorted
Distorted descriptions of who you are and what you stand for and it's very strange to me and I don't know
I mean I kind of do know that you're challenging a lot of people's beliefs and the way they
You know, they've structured these beliefs, but it's very frustrating to me and I'm sure it must be way more frustrating for you
It's it's kind of it's surreal to me because I was talking with my kids about this the other day
You know
The way people think I am especially if they read you know
The hip pieces that the journalists have written and maybe even watch me in those interactions, you know
they think I'm provocative and they think I like combat and conflict and you know and
I don't I'm not combat at sea and I really don't like conflict that much
I go out of my way quite a bit to avoid it and
you know, I'm
misogynist except that almost to be all the people I've ever worked with in my whole life have been women and I've been in a
women dominated field and
like
and
I never thought of myself as right-wing that's for sure
I mean, I mean maybe now that the far-left is gone completely off the deep end
It's like well, maybe I'd be classified as a conservative, but that's mostly because as a social scientist
I learned that you shouldn't conduct large-scale experiments on huge swathes of the
Population and assume that your stupid idea is going to work out correctly because it won't
You can't even get people to behave properly in the lab for like half an hour
So how you think you're gonna get a whole society to do what you want?
You know as a consequence of passing a piece of legislation is beyond me. But yeah, it's it's and here's something else
That's weird. You know like if you read the newspapers
when this this new you knew I got
Disinvited from Cambridge Cambridge Divinity School every what what a thing to be disinvited from a Divinity School its Christ
you have to be Satan himself to get disinvited from a Divinity School and
Well, it's so much crazy, you know
And I just wanted to go down there and learn some more about the biblical stories the exodus stories. That was the idea and and
Then to get disinvited to have that be a whole big scandal. It was just like
what the hell man, it's it's
It's quite the crazy
Situation and then so you read about all this and and you see this online and you think God his life must just be hell
because of all the controversy but then when I go out in the streets or to my lectures or anywhere
It's completely different. It's
Unbelievably different like so now if I walked it walk down the street
I mean when you walk down this street, you must just get I mean you just must get
identified all the time
But yeah, if you go out in an hour how many people will come up to you?
Depends where I go
But if I'm in Hollywood, it's pretty pretty crazy
If I go around young people if you see men and their shaved heads and tattoos it gets nuts
my people
Walking down the street and it doesn't really matter where usually I get approached five or six times in an hour by people and
you know, they're always very polite and they're very apologetic and
They they are happy about something they've read or listened to or whatever are often. They talk about our podcast
That's pretty damn common. That was common throughout Europe as well
and you know
They tell me about some dark part of their life and how they're doing much better and you know how their friends have been watching
My videos and feeling better about it. So it's just
ridiculously positive just all the time and then when I go to my lectures
It's the same thing. It's like yeah crazily positive. So, you know we've had
303 mm people at the lectures so far and there hasn't been one
negative
Occurrence we had one heckler once who was rapidly
escorted from the building and he knew he was going to get as scored and so he was kind of a cooperative heckler, but
Like no one's coming there with
any
thing negative on their mind they're there to listen to a
psychological lecture to have a deep discussion and to try to get their act together and the goddamn journalists
They just don't seem to be able to fathom that like they've got this false cynicism or maybe real cynicism that makes it absolutely impossible
for them to believe that
you know tens of thousands of people could actually be
Serious about improving their life and that I could be having events that were
basically
100% positive and so online I'm a bloody monster, you know
I'm a misogynistic racist and the transfer but not what else am I?
I'm a homophobe and uh Oh a Nazi lots of times and sometimes it's you is shell and
Well, there's a bunch of other things to only disturb me
Excuse me would serve me about you is when they pulled your books out of New Zealand
When a New Zealand bookstore decided to pull your books because of the Christchurch massacre
like what does a book on self-improvement and
taking responsibility
What does that have to do with a horrific mass. Murder? I mean this the idea that they can
Connected those two together and that they decided that in some way or shape your words of encouragement
And recognizing the importance of discipline and of taking responsibility and self-reliance that those things your your book
Somehow or another had something to do with someone doing something as awful as what happened in Christchurch
It's it's so distorted and that's like the perfect
Example that I cite when I say like think about the fact that this guy's book was removed
And right after something had taken place that had it literally nothing to do with anything you've ever said ever
Yeah, well
They kind of got their comeuppance in some ways because people started to point that they were still carrying mine counts so doctor
don't you know and then they were also carrying a book that
Showed you how to turn a semi-automatic into a fully automatic
and so, you know
You got to be careful when you go after someone for their sins that you don't have a few sins of your own like gliding
Around where people can you know sort of observe them. Anyways, they reverse that decision, but but Tom's good. Yeah
Yeah, that was good, but it's very weird
So I'm going to the UK here right away
Now we're talking about me and we weren't supposed to be but I'm going to the UK right away cuz the paperback is launching there
And so I'm gonna be talking to journalists and talking to UK journalists, man. That's like jumping into a
tub of well, not full-grown crocodiles, but you know like
anyways
Hey, so what you're trying to say is?
Yeah, they're pretty snappy
Soon. Yeah
I've got some trepidation about that. But so it's a funny. It's a funny life, too
It's a very peculiar life to be involved in and I'm not exactly ever sure what to make of it on a day-to-day basis
But it does give ones most peculiar
so that's what's most peculiar for you is that you were not famous for most of your adult life and
then over the last four years you've been catapulted and
Become one of the most famous if not the most famous
Psychologists on the planet Earth. Yes. It's very disconcerting. It's hard to get it. It's actually rather hard to adjust to that
I mean, maybe it's a function of age
I found you know when when I was younger
And I used to move from place to place
Take me about a year to adapt a but I also noticed that as I got older
Every time I moved it took me longer to adapt by the time you're 56, you know, if you know someone for 10 years
It's like you feel like you just started to get to know them a bit, you know when you're 17
You have a roommate for six months. It's like your best friends for the rest of your life
so great is a very difficult thing to adapt to I I can't I
can't I
Can't really wrap my mind around and then it I guess it's also partly because it's true no matter where I go
like I went to Slovenia, you know, and it's
Everybody speaks English in Slovenia, by the way, and you are a big hit in Slovenia. I don't know if you know this, but I
It looks to me like the podcast YouTube world has even more impact in places
Where the press is not very reliable
Like everybody you about are everybody knew about our interviews in our podcasts
and so we stopped in Slovenia constantly, which is that was a real shock to
so buddy video
so the shock is and this is the weird thing about YouTube and about podcasts is that it's not
It's just not one time three or two countries. It's like every damn country. And so
it's
but I'm really fortunate really fortunate because like I said all the public encounters I have are are
Extremely positive. They're hard to cope with though
You know in some sense because people are always they always tell me a serious story. You know, they say I
Was in some sort of Hell of some sort six months ago too much drugs or alcohol or a bad relationship
Or not getting along with my family or underemployed or nihilistic or depressed whatever, you know
Like whatever little corner of hell they have to occupy and they've been practicing
Something like maybe developing a vision for their life or trying to live a more meaningful life or taking more responsibility
Or like really making an effort to pull their families together
and to end to advance at work regardless of what their job is and and
It's working and so they're always like shell-shocked that is working and thrilled to death, but it's so strange to have these intense
20-second 30-second conversations with people about really deep elements of their life and then you know
it's it's a shock and then you walked along the street and it's a normal day and then someone else comes up and does the
Same thing. It's like I don't know what to do with it emotionally. It's it's
Cuz maybe you know, someone might tell you that I don't know
Maybe they tell you that something
if you do be helping that, maybe they tell you that once a year once every five years or something, but
To have it happen. All the time is I don't know it
I think it fills me with kind Saro like I'm really happy that it's happening and everything but
There's still something about it. That's deeply and
and and
deeply moving and difficult to adjust to
so
This is ro because so many people are struggling out there and that you're again
well, the sorrow is that there's so many people struggling out there and
They don't have this sort of they they have so little support that my lectures and podcasts in the book were
What was necessary to help them straighten themselves out? It's like, you know, you just can't imagine how many people out there?
Haven't heard an encouraging word
Yeah, their home on what's the old song and home on the range?
Yeah, that's where you don't hear a discouraging word. Well, these people have never heard an encouraging word
that's it's sad to see how calm and that is and how little
it takes to return that around and it's so fun out there in the lectures because you know a lot of the people in my
Lectures are correct, you know the same people you were talking about that stopped you at Hollywood, you know, they're kind of rough
Working-class guys, that'd be about 30% of my audience. I would think you know, and they're not the sort of people that you would
Stereotypically presume would come to an hour-and-a-half lecture on you know
Philosophy and psychology, but man, they're listening. They're listening like mad and it's so
Fun and interesting to watch them
think it through and to and to take this seriously and you know and they come up afterwards and they say, you know
I've been watching your lectures and I'm a much better husband
or I'm a much better father and sometimes they have their girlfriend or wife with them and she says the same thing and you know,
It's really nice, man
Trudy said yeah
Well, you really are making a giant impact and it's only understandable that it would be difficult for you to wrap your head around
What this is and it's it's not something that very few human beings ever get to experience
It's a very very very tiny percentage of our population
Worldwide has ever put into position like you're put into so I will see let's look at your position
I asked you this one time
So you you last time we talked? I think you were getting something to prop
Hundred million downloads a month on your podcast. What are your fingers if you didn't if you don't mind?
don't
double bad jay-z Christ
That's just unblessed with YouTube with the YouTube and all the YouTube clips
And it's it's it's actually probably more than that. It's nuts. I it's gotten to the point where I
try to pay as little attention to the numbers as possible and just concentrate on doing the show because
I think if I pay attention to it too much. I
Think I might pay attention to too much. Am I losing my mind? I mean, it's just it's it's
untenable, it's just the sheer volume of human beings when you if you if you were ever on a stage and
You were looking out at 300 million people. What would that look like?
I mean it's not 300 million people because it's 300 million downloads in a month
But the real number of human beings you're interacting with I mean, I don't know what that is. It's 50 million people
I don't know how many actual million people are listening to the show or watching the show on a regular basis
But it's an unmanageable number in terms of like reading comments or trying to pay attention to what they want or what they don't want
It's it's very strange
Yes, it's a very weird. It's very weird position to be in there's no doubt and the strange thing is too. Is that well?
We've talked about this before too like this is early days, right?
I mean that this has only been happening for about how long have you been doing your YouTube videos?
The YouTube videos are only a few years. So I think it's only three or four years. The podcast will be 10 years in December
Right. Okay. So 10 years that's starting to become a decent chunk of life
But 3 or 4 years that's still new and I mean the podcast market and the YouTube market are still their brand new technologies
fundamentally
Yeah fundamentally, and now you're seeing corporations trying to capitalize on it
and I'm sorry to get these very bizarre offers to make my podcast exclusive on this platform or that platform and
You know these these companies are there throwing crazy amounts of money around that podcast
like
networks hundreds of millions of dollars to buy podcast networks
So it's it's it's becoming very very strange because what was a joke five or six years ago
Literally like why are you wasting your time doing a podcast? I used to hear that all the time
Now, it's how did you do this? How did you make this podcast so popular and you need a totally different question?
yeah, what well it's so strange because
so many people have
Nobody realized that there is a an audience for on-demand audio and you see the same
But not just on-demand audio but long-form conversation
Yeah, one of them
I mean even my friend Ari is one of my best friends would always tell me you got to edit your shows
Nobody wants to listen to anything. That's three hours long
so I'd say well then they don't have to listen and he's like
you like you're you're doing yourself a disservice and I'm like, I don't think I'm like
why not if
Someone only has an hour then listen to it for an hour
Like you're not gonna I mean you might miss out some information
But it's not going to change your life like do whatever you want to do
but I like talking to people for long periods of time because I
Think you really only get cooking after like the first half hour forty minutes. That's when you get comfortable
You sort of get a into a groove of communication
you know of figuring out this person's rhythm and thought processes and
It you you and then as you expand on these ideas and you share
Information back and forth to each other after an hour an hour and a half two hours
That's when things really start getting deep and oftentimes the last hour of a 3-hour podcast is the best hour. Yeah
well, that intuition was certainly right and
Revolutionary you never know when you come up with a revolutionary idea that
Means as part of my revolutionary ideas just me being stubborn just like I didn't care. I wasn't doing it for money
So the only reason why I was doing it was because I enjoyed talking to people like you or many of my other guests
I I want to talk to it's a very rare opportunity
Where I would get a chance to sit down with someone like you with no
Distraction no other people in the room, no cell phones and just talk. Yeah three hours
Yeah, that's so unusual in our world and our constantly distracted world
And I think I've gotten gotten a fantastic education because of that
I mean, it's really enlightened me on so many different subjects and expanded my understanding
Of people in general and since Percy series. I mean man you're up on those
Up on the conspiracy theories just to keep track of the damn things
Well, you got to know what people think of you, you know, I've been lately. I'm a Zionist shill
This is the route most recent one. I didn't know this design in the show. Oh, yeah yours Arnaz. Chill. Yeah
I'm a white supremacist too. Depending on who you ask. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I've got those two things as well
So and that's like it's real interesting to be able to juggle both of those identities. It's like yeah
White supremacists the next it's sort of like yeah under fluid except on the political spectrum. Yeah
Why do you have to be conservative or Democrat?
You know, sometimes you're one and sometimes the other depends on the day and there's no real
Stand-up like all the way out to the edges
You know, yeah gender fluid is my favorite
that's my favorite thing that's going on right now or someone could be like a
Woman for a few hours and then be a man for the next six, you know, I ran back and forth
I read although I don't know if this is true
but I but I read it several places and I actually look I read that the
Olympic Committee is gonna let trans people compete in
the Olympics in the next competition
I'm not surprised because the Olympic the IOC
The Olympic Committee is incredibly corrupt and I think what they do. First of all is disgraceful
They make billions of dollars the athletes make zero. I think it's disgusting
I think everything about what they do is corrupt and the idea that they're there for fair and and and and
Pure competition is nonsense. They're there to make shit loads of money and that's what they're good at
And with the doing is putting on these gigantic events where they profit in its
Spectacular and staggering ways and the athletes dedicate their entire life
To these moments and they literally make nothing and then after that if they're lucky
if they're very famous and popular they can eke out a living with
endorsements, right or if you know for the rare person like Michael Phelps or someone like that who's just a true outlier they can actually
Get wealthy from it, but it's very very rare
most of those athletes will be in severe debt most of those athletes either have to get sponsored or
They have to find someone who is willing to
Share the burden and and help them achieve their goals, but without some sort of altruistic
Benefactor who's got millions of dollars to pour into their camp. I mean it's just
It's disgusting. They're professional athletes. I mean, that's what they do with their entire life
You want to win a gold medal in the Olympics in?
Gymnastics, you can't have a side job. You can't be working eight hours a day
No
you have to be a professional athlete and the Olympic Committee's know this and and if you've never paid attention to
how
They've let people get away with cheating
I mean there's a fantastic documentary out right now
By Brian Fogle called Icarus and it's all about the Sochi
Olympics and how Russia cheated in the Sochi Olympics and the IOC
barely punished them
They punished a few people and how the IOC and the world anti-doping agency all they're they have people from each
Book they have from each organisation
They share like they go back and forth that work for one and they work for the other and they're they're totally in conflict
It's a total conflict of interest and it's a it's a dirty business. So if the tide of political
Perception is that it's a good progressive thing to have transwomen
Competing in the UFC or not in the you I shouldn't say the UFC that'll never happen. But transwomen
competing in the Olympics and that this was
Whatever he wanted they would just do it
They would do it regardless of whether or not it's fair regardless of whether or not it made sense and they would do it
Just to get more eyes on the show just to get more money and that's that's what they're there for
That's what they're good assassinating to see how all that plays out because it's so absurd I was looking
I looked up some stats the other day because I was curious. You know, it's like, okay
I know that all the differences between men and women are socially constructed but nonetheless, I went looked up the biological
comparison of strength, you know and the typical woman has
30% of the upper-body strength of the typical man and about 55% of the lower body strength now
That's like that's a big difference man. That makes the average man three times as strong
Not for body Jesus that gives you an advantage. That's just well, it's criminal
So it well it is but the question is how much do you lose from the conversion?
from estrogen you lose some but if a woman
Say look if you have an athlete who's a woman who's 32 years old and it turns out that she's been taking
steroids her entire adult life
So she's been taking steroids for 12 years everyday and then decides to stop taking them right before the Olympics
Wouldn't everybody agree that she has a massive advantage
Wouldn't everybody agree that most likely her tendon strength her muscle strength or bone structure. All of that has been
completely altered by taking
Performance-enhancing drugs we would all agree to that. Well, guess what?
That's what you're doing
If you're a man for 30 years and then you decide to transition and become a woman for - even if you're taking estrogen
Even if you go through this night you understand is apart from the obvious
unfairness of that, uh
what what I struggle with understanding is the
triumphalism of the
victors is that they enter these contests and then they win and then they
Celebrate their victory as if it's our genuine victory despite the fact I'm wiped out these women who've been
working mostly within the rules for like, you know
Maybe no decades, but certainly many many years in succession and they just blow them away
especially in like strength
Contests and then they they actually treat that like they won and then they also claim it as a moral victory
You know and for me, that's just that the only thing the only thing I see in that is a narcissism
That's so deep that it's almost unfathomable. It's like how can you take pride in that sort of?
Victory unless you don't see who it is that you're defeating. I don't get it
well, it shows how
pathological this whole thing really is when you're when you're dealing with the idea that you can turn a
person into someone of the opposite gender not just
Recognize them as being a woman and treat them as a woman and allow them to use whatever name they would like
I'm all for that but it's that you are going to say no
This is a woman and she should be able to compete with women including in combat sports rugby
There's a male to female trans athlete and that plays rugby in Australia
that's two hundred and forty pounds and
Just smashing women and I don't think there's any real
Standards that are universal in terms of like what do you have to go through in terms of your conversion therapy? And
Like what what about size differences when you're dealing with a high-impact sport?
No, that's a little minefield like the right
Nautical end of it is well, you're the gender that you say you are and the conversion is irrelevant
And I don't know how that translates into the sports world
But my sense is that if the same thing happens in the sports world that's happened in the political world that it will be
basically
Indistinguishable from win it's like well now I'm a woman
just like I have a guy on my podcast recently and this this came up and it was a big argument and
He is essentially his stance was he is all for inclusiveness and he wants
He would like to move towards a world where trans athletes can
and they're included and they can compete as women and I was trying to explain the the benefits of
being a male the physical benefits of being a male and competing against women and
You know, he just didn't want to hear it
It was just in denial of but it was it was
It was going against these preconceived notions that he had and that this in the ideology
There's a part of progressive ideology. That is you're supposed to look at a trans woman as
Every bit a woman. Yeah, if they're supposed to accept the doctrine that all
Differences between men and women are socially constructed which is of course an a doctrine. That's I
think nonsense delusions nonsense
It's yes and it's delusional for some even deeper reason that's even harder to fathom and I don't know what it is
Yeah, it is hard to fathom. I don't I don't understand the root of it
I really don't I even when I talk to people who
Subscribe to these notions. I don't understand the logic. I don't understand
Where's where's the breakdown in their perception of the world where they don't see and there's nothing that we got into
Now saying another thing that we got into was
children
Transition and then he was in for the for I keep hearing this
This is something that keep hearing is driving me mad
That hormone blockers that these puberty blockers are reversible. They keep saying that they like they're harmless
They're reversible if the child changes their mind, they could always just get off the button. The results are reversible
That's not true. You're affecting the development of a child
If you're using these hormone blockers
You are changing the way the child is going to develop because they're not going to have testosterone
Where normal boy would if they're transitioning from male to female if you're doing this to a six-year-old kid
The the the notion that this is completely reversible
It's completely disingenuous because that child is not going to go through the same developmental
Period physically as they would if they had access to testosterone, they're just not it's just not true
It's not true if you talk to medical doctors, it's not true
If you talk to biologists
It's it's just not true and it's something that they use to try to justify the air quotes
Harmlessness of this particular type of therapy that they're encouraging. Yeah, and it's just
It's just to say that there's nothing wrong with being trans and I don't think there is anything wrong being trans
but I think there is something wrong with making decisions for a child or allowing a child to make decisions that will
Massively impact them for the rest of their life and to make that decision when you're six
Like I could only imagine if I was a person who had gone through that and then having this conversation with my parents going
Why the fuck did you let me make that decision?
It's really interesting to see that play itself out in the courts in about 12 years
Because
You don't live your games six-year-old get a tattoo
Right exactly
I mean and tattoos fairly reversible the whole thing about it is nonsense and it's it's this whole
progressive ideology that they're subscribing to there's a doctrine like you have to there's all these
Different things that you have to subscribe to if you want to accept that ideology. Yes is one of them
This is one of them trans killers. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah trans children. You can't say yeah, that is problematic
You can't you're not allowed to say that you can't even entertain the notion that this could be a particularly
egregious offence on
A child if they decide that that was a bad idea
Adapting if the primary idea is that our
Society is an oppressive patriarchy and I think that's like number one idea then anything that touches on that in any way
immediately becomes untouchable and so in order for the adults to make the decision
Then you have to believe in
authority because the adults have the authority and if you're gonna believe that the adults have the authority then you have to believe that
hierarchy has some value and then that tangles you up with your insistence that you know hierarchy is definitely
oppressive and and the especially the Western form of hierarchy
And so I think that central axiom is so vital that anything that gets near it
it's twisted and bent like it's too close to a gravitational field and the logic is irrelevant because that fundamental central issue has to be
supported at all cost
Well, this is one of the conundrums of our conversation one of the widow
we came to this one point where I said now if a child identifies as a girl I
Said why not? Just let them be a girl. Why do you have to fuck with their hormones?
Why do you have to be so CH whatever?
Yeah, if it's all nonsense what I mean, I this is my take on all this like be just be a girl
Anything where you need?
Science to consistently it. Yeah, right anything will you need medical science to consistently inject chemicals into your body?
They're gonna alter your hormones
irreversibly at a very young age like
Why why is that natural? Why are you saying this? This is what what this person
Biologically or psychologically needs are you sure you see there's something that you know things I'm construct
It's particularly damn weird if you insist that gender is a social construct
Yes, like if it's a social construct and what the hell are the hormones for?
Exactly. So that was my point. Yeah, we didn't have an answer to that. No, no
That's a rough one man. That's that's okay. So we're gonna go back to Boston
Okay. Okay. So you said that's really where things started for you
So you moved there were thirteen and so what did you get involved in?
First of all, like what kind of kid were you in school?
Barely pay attention
I was I if ad D is real I certainly had it
And I was very very interested in what I was interested in
I was very uninterested in people telling me what to do, and I essentially couldn't wait to get out of school
But I would excel at things that I had interest in and B
Initially was art I was I wanted to be a comic book illustrator
Until I really got into martial arts and martial arts became the focus of my life around 14 15 years old
that's when I really
became
Massively obsessed and that was really the first thing that I ever did
where I I really didn't feel like a loser like I really felt like oh
I actually have some talent there that I actually can be exceptional. There's like something is that you know grew up
Constantly moving didn't really have a lot of friends. I would be new in this town
I'd get picked on I wasn't a big kid and there was a lot of a lot of issues with that
Psychologically, and I didn't like being afraid of other kids. I didn't like not knowing what to do ever ran into kids
They were gonna bully me and pick on me. So I learned that's an annoying thing not to do what to do about
yeah, yeah and
You know martial arts changed that 180 degrees and then I became someone who I would be afraid of, you know
It'd be I became the opposite of what I was
So what I was was someone who was terrified of conflict didn't know what to do and what I became was, you know
Talk about no champion
I became a martial arts champion and I knew how to fight so hard on it
So many times look so like what did you do?
You just walked into a joint one day and decided that that's what you were gonna do. Like. How did it come about?
It was very fortunate
Well, I've done a little bit of martial arts training at a different place
and then one day I was in Boston for a
Red Sox game at Fenway Park, and as I was walking home to the train station with a friend of mine
There was a lot of people that were leaving the baseball game
So the lines from the train for the T, which in Boston public transportation was very long
So we decided to go check out the jaehun Kim Taekwondo Institute is right there
And I've been really into martial arts because of what I said, you know, I'm at the aforementioned
insecurities and so I went up the stairs and as I was walking up the stairs just
Fortuitously a guy named John Lee was training and John was a national Taekwondo champion
Who was in preparation for the World Cup?
Which was this huge event that he was taken to the international event that he was about to travel to go to
And he was in the peak of his training and so I walked up to the top of the stairs and I heard this
crazy sound of this what it turned out to be this man kicking this bag and
Slamming his heel into this bag and having to change snap and and rattle and the thud of his heel
Slamming into this leather bag and I got up there and I watched this guy work out
I couldn't believe a person could do that
I've never seen anybody kicks something so hard in real life anybody that had such incredible
martial arts skill like this guy did john, lee who became a mentor of mine and and and taught me quite a bit, but that
Changed everything. I was there the next day. I talked to them. They gave me a brochure a pamphlet and
I was there the next day and I was probably there every day of my life
Give or take a few days here or there if I was injured or something came up until I was 22 years old
So how many hours a day were you spending there all day? I had keys pretty quickly
They gave me keys. They wanted me. Well right away
my instructor recognized that I was pretty obsessed and I was
physically pretty talented
so he
Had me teaching classes
Instead of paying he was like look if it's difficult for you to pay
I'd like to have you teach and there was some wisdom to that too
Because one of the best ways for someone to get good at martial arts is actually to teach
You actually refines your technique you think about it more you're exerting it to people that don't necessarily understand all the mechanics of it
So I started teaching I would teach private lessons to beginners
I would teach group classes, and then eventually I went on to teach at Boston University
I taught at Boston University and when I was 19, I was teaching a credited class there, but he actually counted towards you GPA
Hmm. And so I did that that was I was already US Open champion by then
Did it take so you went in there when you were 13 and you were?
Kid that was had moved around a bunch in car club sports. No 15 by the time I got to day school
okay, and then I had my black belt by the time I was 17 and I was
Competing in the adult division by then before I was ever 18. I was competing as an adult
I mean he might even put me in when I was 16 if I don't know if I remember correctly
And then I won the state championship when I was 18, and I want it every year
From then until I stopped
Great, so year two pros one of four years to run at it there
How long did it take before like were used?
We were you still were you a thin like you were your skinny kid when you started. When did you start to bulk up?
And get big when did you?
Enough so that you know the problems with aggression stop, you know with other people's aggression
Stop being a being a trouble for you. Well, luckily with high school kids heard about it right away
You know, it was one of those things where you know, you find out that some
Wanting it one of the kids you go to school with us flying all over the country kicking people in the head
Right. They just avoided me Yeah, right
It wasn't like, you know, I mean, I certainly never sought out trouble but people avoided me like, you know
Junior and senior year. I had already become this weird kid that was obsessed with martial arts, you know
And I spent you know, most of my life from the time most 15 12 21
Training and competing. I probably fought over a hundred times. I traveled all over the country
I fought in California I fought in Ohio
I thought I thought all over the place and bring a lot of
local tournaments in Connecticut in Massachusetts and New Hampshire's were won the US Open and
You know just bought everywhere and that was that was mostly like my life
Yeah, it was most of my life until I got into stand-up comedy
Great so that we'll see you had a very singular life like that stuff. Yeah hundred percent singular
Yeah, Annie CLE singular, but I avoided most of the pitfalls of high school partying and all that stuff
I didn't do that because I was scared of getting hurt. I was scared if I showed up for training
Hungover that I'd get beat up
And that it would somehow I was scared of anything that would take even a tiny bit away from my performance as a fighter
Because I was obsessed with it that scare scared was that actually fear of?
Being hurt because you made a mistake or fear of losing the competition or fear of failure of being harassed
Competition fear of her being hurt in training training alone was as scary as any competition
I just just complete completely by luck wandered into one of the best schools in the world for Taekwondo the
hit
they had produced multiple national champions and
You know real top of the food chain athletes in terms of Taekwondo
It was just just dumb luck that I walked into that school. And you know, I could have walked into another school
That was a few blocks away. That was terrible. Just three I just got lucky. I got really really really lucky. So how useful
How useful are the technical martial arts like Taekwondo and like in an actual street fight
Not that useful. I mean more useful than knowing nothing but
not as useful as brazilian jiu-jitsu or
Now a lot of people now are just learning mixed martial arts
Great
Which is essentially what you see in the UFC?
where they're jack of all trades master of none and the argument there's two arguments like there's art there's an argument that that is a
good thing to learn and
then there's other arguments that being a
specialist first is the best thing and then learning the other things later in life is the best way to go about it like a
specialist
particularly a striker or a grappler like being an elite wrestler or an elite jujitsu artist and then
learning all the other stuff later in life because you have such a
Significant advantage if you can bring the fight into your realm of expertise
So if you are a striker every fight starts standing up and if you're an elite striker and you know how to avoid
takedowns and you know how to wrestle enough to keep a guy off you you'll have such a
Significant advantage striking that you can dominate the competition and we've seen that in the UFC
we've seen that both grappling and with with striking that it seems that if you become a
Specialist in one particular area and then learn those other things you'll be better off
But you can't really just be a specialist whether it's in Muay Thai or Taekwondo or jujitsu
You really kind of have to understand if you're a grappler
you really have kind of have to understand striking and
If you're a striker, you really kind of have to understand grappling in order to at least avoid it
Mm-hmm-hmm
So and so during this time too. I mean, you've got to be a pretty big guy. So when did that start happening?
Were you working out like mad while you were training as well?
like yeah
But I was much thinner it was much thinner back then I didn't do much weightlifting because I was trying to compete in certain weight
Classes like when I was 17 was one it was the I was cutting weight when I was 17 and 18
I was trying to make 140 pound weight class, but it was really probably about 10 pounds plus heavier than that
And I would dehydrate myself and it was really affecting my performance
And then when I was 18, I moved up to the next weight class. That was 154
I believe it was and when I moved up to that weight class I got way better. That was my really excelled
That's when I became
like a real
National class athlete was when I moved up and I would but I still wasn't lifting weights much
I was just doing taekwondo training
It was just a lot of heavy bag work some calisthenics
But mostly it was martial arts work. Then when I started getting into jiu-jitsu it was long after I stopped competing
That's when I started really getting into weightlifting because jiu-jitsu
involves
Grappling and I think the advantage to being strong and grappling is pretty significant, right? It's gigantic
and so that's when you know, it was like
29 there so like that that's when I really started
heavily weightlifting and and
Later how long did your initial martial arts career last? I
Fought from the time. I was fifteen and I think I had my last fight it was either I was twenty-one or twenty-two
I don't really remember those but the last three fights were kickboxing fights and I had while I was doing stand-up comedy
So I was I was spreading myself too thin I was working a bunch of different jobs
I was working delivering newspapers. I was working as a private investigators assistant. I did some construction
I did a bunch of different odd jobs to make a living and
I
Decided somewhere long
Yeah, every board construction agent teaches a fighter stand-up comedian, you know
Situation, yeah
well jiu-jitsu came later jiu-jitsu didn't come until I was I think I was 28 or 29 when I first started transition to
Those that was mostly just cut window in kickboxing
I really got into kickboxing and I was and I had three kickboxing fights and I was entertaining the idea of fighting professionally
But I was also starting to get really worried about brain damage. I
Started to see some something from kickboxing
Specifically, yeah specifically because it was I was getting hit a lot more
Oh, yeah
the the kickboxing spar and that I did I did that over the course of about two years where I really got heavily into
Kickboxing I did a lot of boxing sparring and a lot of what you call gym wars
where guys would just we would beat the shit out of each other and you'd get hurt and he'd come home with headaches and
You basically were fighting in the gym
I mean
It's not a wise way to do it though the smart gyms now and the best martial artists
They very rarely spar hard
They most of the time they spark technically, so they're they're hitting each other, but they hit each other like this
They don't they don't blast each other full blast. They sort of touch each other
They're working on timing and occasionally you go hard just to make sure that you you can survive
with these techniques in a fire fight that you know how to deal with it once you get hit but
We didn't really is the lower combat intensity still and still useful for training for the real thing
Yes, it's it's but you have to have some high intensity and some people that high intensity
They actually have drills that they use to sort of
to simulate actual
Exchanges that you would have there's a lot of science to it. Now that didn't exist back then
The the gyms that I came up in were real hard-nosed
Really, you know tough gyms
If you if you weren't tough, you did not survive and they weren't interested in anybody that couldn't take a shot or anybody
That wasn't willing to go to war
So you would put on a mouthpiece you put on a cop you put your shin pads on and you'd beat the fuck out of
each other and that was a big part of
learning how to fight it was these sparring sessions were brutal they were
Nerve-racking you'd be scared. He'd be scared going into him
There'd be you know
I'd be anxious the night before if I knew how to spar a
Particular guy the next day because I knew it was dangerous. You basically were having fights all the time
So I'd have fights several days a week you would fight, you know, it wasn't really sparring you. Did I hit guys?
Covering a lot two men all the time from that so okay. Yeah. You're just big hole in this story, too
So like you're doing great at Taekwondo
you've got your national level athlete and
You switch to kickbox and you're worried about getting hurt and that seems reasonable
because like how about not being brain damaged by the time you're 30, but then
You know, I guess kind of what I'm wondering is like how many shots in the head?
Did you have to take before you thought being a stand-up comedian was a good?
well
one of my dear friends to this day is a guy named Steve Graham and
Steve was when I met him I was 15 and he was probably
30 and he was going through his residency as an ophthalmologist and
He had been a flight surgeon in the US Air Force and just he would he had been on the US Ski Team
Who's a national skiing champion just a wild man
just a guy who took chances and lived life to the fullest and was
just one of the most hard-working people I ever met in my life and
I
Would make him laugh and I would make some of the people laugh and training because we were always nervous
Everyone we would go to tournaments
We were nervous because you know, I'd seen many of my friends get knocked unconscious and Easterners get kicked in the head
taken to hospitals and you know
I'd seen it in the gym - a lot of guys getting beat up and knocked out in the gym
It was constant and you know and you know, it had happened to me a couple of times. I've been hurt and
So we had this gallows humor mover. We would go to these events
We travel to these tournaments and everybody would be the ten should be so thick
everybody would just dig taking deep breaths and trying to relax and just stay loose before you fight and I would be
the I would be the class clown in that environment and
When you were in high school or junior high like but you know I didn't have that so but I did circumstances
Yes, I did have a sense of humor, but it would manifest itself in cartoons
I would draw like cartoons at the teacher. You know, I would like draw cartoons of like certain kids that were kissed
the teachers asked I would draw them like kissing the teachers ass and saying ridiculous things and if the teacher
Was late to a class and you know, and I knew I had enough time
I would put something on the chalkboard and then pull down the screen
So that when they would go to use the chalkboard the chalkboard to pull the screen back up and see this
ridiculous cartoon that I had drawn the whole class would laugh and the teacher would ask who did this and
Luckily, nobody ratted me out. But so I that I
enjoyed making people laugh
But that was it wasn't it wasn't most mostly wasn't things I said
Was mostly cartoons, right? That's very different. Yeah. Yeah, but with comedy was with the
Fighting when we were getting ready to compete. I was just trying to add some levity
I was just trying to lighten up the mood because everybody was it was also it was a charged environment
so anything that I said that was actually funny would get a giant reaction and that
Became addictive and I was pretty good at doing impressions. So I do impressions of our friends do impressions of our instructor all these in
ridiculous situations and
My friend Steve Graham and my other friend Ed shorter who's another one encouraged me who I lost touch with
unfortunately
He he said you should be a comedian
and
my take on it was
You think I'm funny because you're my friend
But other people gonna think I'm an asshole at the things that I think are funnier fucked up Frank
I have a fucked up sense of humor. I mean Here I am
Devoting most of my time to trying to get really good at knocking people on conscience. That's what I was though
so I was trying to do I was trying to separate people from their consciousness that was
Doing my best every day to get good at that. So my sleep reverse psychedelic drug
Yeah, it was the worst. Yeah, but it was I was trying to hurt people. That's what I was trying to get good at
I was trying to get good at hurting human bodies and
I just didn't think I thought that I was such an such a weirdo and such an outlier in terms of like how society viewed
Combat physical
candy hand combat and interactions with each other that no one would think that the things that I was making fun of were funny and
This guy convinced me to go to an open mic night
He's like you should go to no mic night. Just go
There's a lot of comedy clubs in Boston go and watch and I went and watched and I realized wow
one of the things about going to open mic night is
Most open mic comedians are so terrible that it encourages you to try it
This is you're like well, I can't be that bad
like I I might have something that's better than some of these people and then you know
You'd see a real professional go up and it would be so discouraging because you'd say that god my god
I'll never be that funny. That guy's impossibly funny
but I knew
from martial arts that if I worked really hard at something I could get good at it and
I had this thought that maybe I could do that with comedy because I didn't want to fight anymore
I was already I was already on my way
Kind of out the door. I was really worried about the brain day. I was on my way out the door
From the time I was like 19 from the time. I was 19 no starting to worry about brain damage and then so you're
Like you're 53
I'm 51 51 51 and so much how much damage did you actually see, you know?
Like lots of people. I don't know I
Don't know I mean
How about physically muscularly and that sort of thing. Oh, no, I'm fine. I had a bunch of surgeries
I've had my nose repaired. My nose was destroyed
I had no nose
Like the inside of my nose was just didn't work until I was 40 and then I had a deviated septum
Operation they had to cut out giant
Calcified chunks of scar tissue and all sorts of I literally my nose was useless until I was 40 years old
Oh
My god
If you have a deviated septum and you can't breathe out of your nose my god this I
Couldn't do that to those 40. Yeah. It was just all bro. I broke my nose
who knows how many times at least a dozen and
It would just was always bloody. I was always getting punched or kicked in the nose
As a sense organ to be at the in the middle of your face where you get punched
well, it has this little tiny piece of cartilage -
Yeah
It also makes your eyes swell shut it makes your eyes water
Makes it difficult to see when you get hit in the nose the in hey, the nose is really annoying
But other than that I had both my knees
Reconstructed ACL tears and both knees how to get them then reconstructed and you know a bunch of other stuff
Oh, yeah, so you took your bunch of other broken things? Yeah
Pretty good B. Yeah broken knuckles and I broke a lot of stuff but uh
But everything works great now I mean after surgery and I mean for a person who's been through what I do
What I've done with my body my body works remarkably
It's a man actually, you know
That's a lot. You think you'd be arthritic at least in some of your joints and that sort of thing
No, I'm pretty good. I mean I also very proactive. I do a lot of yoga
I've had a bunch of stem cell therapies to deal with some
Significant tears and injuries that I've had but all that, you know knock on wood everything works pretty good
The brain damage thing is I don't know. I really don't know. I really
sit back and think about some of those Wars when I was in a
Gym wars in particular and some fights and my last fight I got TKO I got stopped
I got hit with a left hook and dropped and my legs went out from under me
And then I got up and I get hit again called out again. They stopped the fight and
that was when I decided I'm gonna stop I was like
I'm not giving this the same amount of dedication I gave when I was at my best
I was reading myself way too thin with comedy and I I just didn't I didn't have this same
Hunger for it that I had when I was young or younger and I was also very aware of the consequences
At that point in my life. I was like this I know where this is going
I saw guys at the gym that were punched drop
You know that were slurring their words and they would forget things and and I had seen some people
Progressed towards that and it was very very disturbing to me
You know
I'd be lying in bed at night after a hard sparring session in my head would be
Pounding and I would think what am I doing in my fucking brain? Like what am I doing myself and
I
Got real lucky that I found stand-up comedy. I mean if the UFC was around back, then I most certainly would have started fighting and
You know and to not be training intelligently because I wasn't training intelligently
I was training like a meathead and that was just all we knew back then I probably would have sustained some pretty
Significant damage before I ever even got into the occupy probably would have already had massive brain damage before I ever had a fight
Great, right, so you so well, that's good. So you you stepped out at an intelligent time
And so then you started your comedy career and you started at open mics. And so yeah, tell me about how that developed
Well open mic nights are very interesting you sign up on a list and you may or may not get on
they pick people out of a hat like say if there's 50 people signing up 30 people get on and
You know you each do five minutes and you know
The the host is generally a professional comedian that brings people up and you know
You have this weird culture of people that are struggling to try to figure out how to make a living in this sort of
Undefined art form. There's no classes. You can take in it that are really worth anything
There's no books that you could buy that are going to teach you anything
It's something that's kind of have to look
The only thing that I like it too is rap music
Because rap music seems to be very similar in the fact that you have to learn from other practitioners
You don't really learn from books
You don't there's no like I mean, maybe there is now I don't know of any like real legitimate university courses on stand-up comedy
I don't think they could teach it to you. Anyway, because everyone does it differently
But I think that's the case with rap music as well
I think you kind of have to learn from the people that are already doing it and one good thing about Santa Comi particularly today
today, it's much more open and inviting and
Comedians have a lot more camaraderie than they did in the beginning because they're not fighting over scraps anymore
now there's so many venues so many different places to work and then there's YouTube and
the internet and
Comedians, there's much more of a supportive community of people trying to help people and I try to really concentrate on that
I spend a lot of time trying to help young comics. I put a lot of young comics on my shows. I have them host
You know, I've got a show tonight and a young comics only been doing it for a few years. Her name is Allie makovski
She's the hosting but she's really funny and I try to encourage them
I try to help them I try to give them advice and try to give them pointers
I tried to when they have great sets I try to you know
Really thank them and say that was excellent
and you got this just keep keep doing what you're doing and you can really make a career doing this because it's such a
Insecure business, it's just so it's such a weird
Undefined path that you have to take and it's and I love the art form. I love it as a consumer
I love it as a person who's an audience member
I really still to this day enjoy watching stand-up but back then it wasn't that supportive
It was you know, we would just support each other. But the professionals weren't that supportive not like they are today few people
There's a guy named Lenny Clark that I'm still good friends with this day and I opened up for he was a Boston
Legend and I was super fortunate to open up for him when I had been
Doing comedy for about a year and he gave me some great advice and that meant the world to me and he was actually on
My podcast just last month. I love that guy. And you know, he helped me out when I was
Really really? I was 21. It was really really young in my comedy career
Put the same amount of dedication into that that you had been putting into the martial arts
Exactly. Yeah, I just became obsessed with it and I just traveled all over the place doing doing open mic nights
I mean me and my good friend Greg Fitzsimmons. We started out together. We're good friends to this day
we started out within a week of each other and
We we used to travel all the way to Rhode Island do a drive, you know
It was an hour-plus drive to go down there just to do five minutes
And then we were at an open mic night for free and it would drive all the way home and just dream about
One day being a professional that was the dream. The dream was to pay your bills by doing comedy
imagine if that that could you could do
Comedy for a living but that was the dream
I would never imagine that I'm doing what I'm doing now, or I'm doing it sold-out arenas, I doubt
Bob wasn't even a hope not it wasn't even like maybe if it goes well I could do this
Maybe I could do that that was never on the menu and you know, it's gotten to this really crazy
astronomical
Complaisant that it's very hard for me to even imagine that that came out of those
strange days in Boston just traveling around all these different weird comedy clubs and
Writing constantly not knowing how to write not knowing how to formulate a joke having like many more misses than hits
You know a lot of bombing. I bombed all the time. I
You know you got to have that ability to
To bomb and come back from a Minka's. Yeah, you're you're gonna have a lot more
Misses than hits that's for sure. That's a lot more
Question the early days. What do you think accounts for that obsessiveness that you described?
And that's a negative way of putting it
I mean, obviously you said that you know when you're in school if you weren't interested you weren't listening at all
but if you were interested in something you would like laser-focused and that really came up in the martial arts, but it obviously
Manifested itself in the stand-up comedy - so what is it about you that?
Enables you what do you think? It is about you that enables you to?
Zero in on something like that to the exclusion of everything else. I
Don't know. I mean, I think some of it has to be attributed to the unhappiness in my childhood
that when I would find something that I did get some joy out of I would just
concentrate all in on that I think some of it also was like
I wasn't really raised with a lot of discipline and I wasn't really raised with a pat
My parents were both my stepdad and my mom were both working all the time
So they they didn't they weren't really around to sort of tell me what to do or how to live and they weren't really around
To let me know that everything was going to be okay
They were always working so they would come home from work at like 6 o'clock or something like that
And you know, I'd been on my own all day me and my sister had been on our own all day, you know
We'd come home. We had a key. We got into the house and it was
when I there was a lot of
Real bad feelings, you know like and when I found something that made me feel good. I just did that
Exclusively, that's all I did and I still have that problem to this day
when I get obsessed with something if I find something that means something to me I
I
think of it all day long if I get obsessed with something it becomes it becomes like a
Mantra that's in the back of my head. And I I I have to
Shut it off
Like I have to do my best to shut it off. Otherwise, I can't listen to people I don't
Look when people are talking to me, I don't want to talk to them
I want to go do that thing that I wanted to write right, you know
It becomes like a compulsion and it could be socially negative
You know, it could be detrimental to relationships and friendships. Yeah. Yeah, but it's like that sort of thing is also
absolutely necessary if you're going to
Develop high level skill at something difficult and unlikely because yeah, unless you're obsessive about it practice it like all the time
The people you're competing with are gonna they're gonna take you out so low funny thing
I would always be terrified that I would run into someone like me
Well, okay
But that's that was the feeder that I would run into someone who is a hundred percent
all-in, and when I was fighting and when I lost my last kickboxing fight, I wasn't all in and I knew I was
And I knew I knew I wasn't the same person. I was when I was like 18 19. I was a
psychopath, I mean I was
100% committed to doing nothing
But that and then as I was examining my future prospects in my life
And I started to become more aware of the problems of what I was doing. I became less and less
I had one fight that I had in
California and Anaheim in the US Nationals in
1980
It must have been
My hmm
It seems like it had to been
86
86 or 87
Somewhere around there
87 somewhere around 87 I
Knocked this guy out with a head kick
I did in front his pants and it was it was
Everybody was people were crying and he was unconscious for a long time. He was unconscious for a solid half hour
whoo, and they dragged him they dragged him off of the
Mat they put him in a stretcher. They took him to the hospital. I never saw him regain consciousness and
I remember thinking that could have easily been me like I didn't have any illusions of me being some impervious in the
Invulnerable person and I was really thinking about how I I hit him so hard my heel was hurting the next day
I was walking with a limp from his head because I wheel kicked him in the head
It's a particularly brutal move. We spin and your your whole leg comes around
You're hitting someone in the head with your heel and he fell like he had gotten shot just fell face-first out cold
snoring and what's the first time that I've done that someone but it was
One of the most brutal because he kind of ran into it too. He was trying to kick me as I was kicking him
So was the force of his body coming towards me and me hitting him
And I was thinking that guy's probably never gonna be the same again
Like he's never gonna get over it psychologically or if he does it's gonna be very hard for him
But he might he might be damaged for the rest of his life
That's a real possibility and then I started thinking am I willing to have that happen to me at 19?
I was 19 years. All those like is this is this what you want to do?
Do you want to get hit in the head like that and never be the same again at 19 because it easily could happen
You know, yeah, that's it. We're at 60 years to live like that
Yeah, we were at an this was a national championship tournament. So he was a state championship
I think from Illinois and I was a state champion from Massachusetts and
You know wasn't like he would he was a black belt and it wasn't like he was an unskilled guy
so
The fact that I was able to do that to him and I was able to do that to a bunch of other guys
I knew that someone out there could do that to me, right?
I knew that I knew that I wasn't the best in the world
And I knew that even though I was a top I was you know, I was a real national level competitor
I wasn't world class. I wasn't the best
especially at 19
And so that doubt that doubt stuck with me
for the next couple of years and it was it was probably the first seed of
My new future was me hurting that guy and thinking about what that was going to be like if that happened to me
Yeah, well, that's a hell of a right turn you took there to go into comedy. So, okay
so how now you became successful as a comedian, so
You started playing in little clubs, like stand-up comedians did and like yeah. How did you get your breaks?
How did your career develop?
well
it took a few years for me to get competent, you know took like two or three years for me to get confident and then
Three years I got
Extremely fortunate again where I met my manager my manager who is my manager to this day
He basically picked me up when I was an open-mic comedian, you know
As I was getting a few paid gigs here and there but I was really an amateur. Um and
He found me he was looking for new talent. He came up from New York
He is he was a like, you know, really well respected and well recognized manager still is of course
his name's Jeff Sussman, and we've been together for
Shit now it must be 28 years
yeah, we've been together since really since I was an amateur and he
That's a successful collaboration to to span that amount of time. Not many changes
Yeah
Yeah, we've been together forever. We've been together forever. We don't even have a contract anymore. He's
We haven't had a contract and things like ten years. So doing all this time
This is just like a bit of a side side question here, but you there have any time at all to pursue relationships with women?
No, yeah. Well you do comedy, you know, you're in clubs at night
Yeah, you have most of your day to do whatever you want
You know to just when I was just a stand-up comedian
I had a lot of free time, you know, I mean you're writing jokes
But you can only do that a couple hours a day or you get bored and it's not
effective and then you're just kind of living your life and hanging out and sometimes the best way to develop your comedy is to have
good social interactions
it's actually kind of important when you're an aspiring comedian to be in a lot of social situations because
You are around people. You hear people say things and then you think what they say a silly or what they say is
You know you disagree or you agree you you see perspectives and points of view and you kind of you
Develop, you know an understanding of how human beings behave it's kind of very important. So yeah, I
Was around a lot of different
Girls and a lot of guys and just being out and and you're always at comedy clubs and nightclubs
But I did write I didn't go out. Other than that, you know
If I wasn't at a comedy club at night, I probably wasn't out
You know
It was always the same thing with like
My obsession with fighting and fighting came way easier for me than stand-up did stand-up was way harder
For me, it was way harder. It was way harder - harder
What was harder, but well, you said it took you two or three years to get confident?
So that was a lot of falling flat on your face. I presume
Yeah, and even then even like three years and I still could bomb at any moment. I
Mean I could have a bad set. I didn't know how to do it. But I also I was socially awkward
I think it took me a while to uh
to not be
Not be so socially awkward, you know, that was that was an issue and you know
It was a lot of it was from my upbringing
But a lot of it was also I kind of cold to me that when I was fighting
Yeah, I didn't want people to like me
I didn't tear like I didn't need them to like me all I needed them to do
I mean I kind of wanted them to be scared of me, you know
I so when I was fighting I wasn't trying to make friends out there at all
I was I was just trying to fuck people up me
so when you were fighting when we were fighting
Did you have any relationships with women or was it or were you pretty not good ones? Not good
No, I didn't I wouldn't allow them to do I wouldn't allow them to have much of my time
you know, I didn't I
Didn't I didn't I think to have a successful relationship you have to spend a lot of time together
You have to communicate you have to you the person has to almost be first place in your life
Yeah, and that was never that was never happening. And so that was that would come up very often
like I was a girl that I was dating in high school and you know
I I stood teach at the school so I had keys to the school
So one time I took her up there because I needed to get a workout in and she wanted to have sex
At the gym and I was like, there's no way I wouldn't do it
I was like this place is sacred
Like there's no chance that she was trying to fool around and I was you know as adamant I was like this is never happening
Like this is my my we'll be a church to me
Like it's not happening and you know so warranty when I was 17 years old
To me at 17 or 18 to say no to sex is crazy
I think we're gonna we're gonna clip that and put it in a little clip that says Jill rule gonna tells a story that no,
sane man would believe
Well, you know I was that was the first refuge that I had from my life of despair
So for me, I wasn't gonna screw that up. Right right
I felt like disrespecting the the Academy like that
Would you like an adult that something is that's something when you're a teenager?
You know like to actually be treated that way it's a good thing not to mess with if you're fortunate enough to have it
Well, I wouldn't even walk on to the training floor by myself with no one around without bowing
Uh-huh. I
mean there was no one there, but I would never
Leave the the common area and step on the training floor without bowing first. Great. Never never
Never okay, so when you're in comedy now
You said you said you were all in as a fighter and youth?
Figure you went all in as a comedian - and did you do that right from the beginning?
Yeah, yeah pretty much Yeah right away
as soon as I realized that I could actually
do this and
As soon as I realized I decided I mean my first set that I ever did I had a bunch of my friends come down
And watch me I wasn't good the first time I ever got on stage
But I got a couple of little chuckles and laughs and then I realized this might be possible
I might be able to do this and then I became obsessed with figuring out how to do it
Because it was I I saw it as a path like okay
This is a thing like this is a thing you could do that
You actually love I got was a huge fan of the art form. I loved watching it
Ever since my parents took me to the movies when I was like 14 or 15
We saw a live on the Sunset Strip was a Richard Pryor
movie in in the theater where he did stand-up and I never seen that before and I remember thinking how
Crazy is it that this guy could just talk and it's so funny
I was falling out of my chair laughing and I was looking around
I remember looking around while the movie was playing but all these people in their chairs is rocking back and forth laughing so hard
Gets really some amazing
Association when you're a young teenager like
16 I know
Bill Cosby, but I saw him live and like I saw him lad too when I was a security guard
Oh, yeah, I saw him like yeah, I was a security guard at great woods
I saw Kinnison there when I was a security guard. So I Rodney Dangerfield there. Yeah, so I quite a few people there
yeah, well, it was something to see him sit on his stool with his cigar and
Get the whole audience like literally hysterical
I mean the guy in front and walk rocking back and forth so hard he could hardly breathe. His wife kept telling him
Back into something vaguely resembling a human being
But it was it's really amazing to see someone with that much command in the audience and so consistently
unbelievably funny
He's the most tragic story in all of show business. Yes, I stood
Next to Michael Jackson and OJ Simpson. I mean those are the three most tragic stories in show business in my mind
Yeah, and and you know, he's a monster. It's crazy
You know the thing that's so strange about Cosby you think well like was this really necessary
Like man, the guy was famous in fifteen different directions and really well-respected. You wouldn't have saved
He would have had to date rape his women, you know, it's just well
Yeah, I mean he if he just he could have just had prostitutes. I mean if he really just needed sex
I don't think that's what it was
I think there was a sick perversion and I think he liked to do that to people he liked to trick them
I mean, I'm just guessing right it has to be something cuz it's so it's so
counterproductive and so
Psychotic it's psychotic. I mean, I don't understand it. You know, I tried to
I've tried to sort of imagine what it must have been like to be around in the 50s or 60s
I think people did that to each other way more
often than we'd like to admit and I think that it was more casual than we would think of today where people would
slip someone a Mickey or you know
I mean he even had a bit that he did back in the way back in the day about giving someone Spanish Fly
That you'd give someone something that would make them warning her
I think he I think he was probably a guy that had an incredibly inflated opinion of himself
Didn't want anybody to ever reject him
experience that a few times again
This is pure speculation and just decided that he was better than people that he could just drug them
It's so safe though because his comedy was basically so like it was generally family-oriented
it was ya know and he put himself forward as a
role model and he was credible like he was credible as an actor as a role model and he seemed credible as a spokesperson is
Kind of kind of makes me think, you know, there's this idea
that the
psychoanalysts had this guy named Eric Newman
Who is a student of carl jung's and one of the things that Norman said he wrote a book called depth psychology?
And the new ethic right after world war ii and it's a it's a great book a little thin book, but it's a great book
one of the things he says in that book is don't be better than you are and
What he meant was he didn't mean don't improve like that would be foolish he meant
beware of
Adopting a persona that makes you a far better person than you actually are because all of that
Part of you that you're not admitting to that's gonna go off and have its own life
Because you're not integrating it, you know
You're suppressing it in some way and you know it and and so it's a living thing, you know all that
Well, like the aggression you had when you were a fighter, that's a big deep part of you
You know
you can't just
push something like that aside and pretend that it's not there and
Think that it's not gonna go off and have some fun when you not paying attention
Yeah, I mean like something like that musta got him is that he was he was split between this reading good guy that he was
trying to be which was like too good and
And
and this this like more monstrous side of his personality that he obviously never integrated or perhaps never even admitted to
It's really a hell of a story man. It's like and it really is a catastrophe
I think it was an absolute bloody catastrophe for his victims obviously and but just as a general
Cultural phenomenon is so awful
Yeah, I couldn't agree more and it you you know you they say you should separate the man from the art
But in his case, it's almost impossible to do because his art was his perception of life
It's like when you're watching him, it's not like a painter or even someone who makes a movie
it's like when you're watching him you're watching him now and all you can think of as he's
Talking about these different things and about I told my children
Well, he's like he's doing this lovable dad. Yeah, you know all you can think of that guy rapes people
Yeah, his rugs them and rapes them. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I can't enjoy it anymore and he's
Unquestionably as far as like this skill. He was one of the greatest of all time
Yeah, yeah. All right. So you got you got a manager and you got a good one. And what happened? Yeah, I
Moved to New York and then once I moved to New York I started
Doing a ton of stand-up comedy
I was traveling all over the place and I got better and better and I've kept working on it working on it and just
doing a lot of gigs and just going all over the place and and then
Two years later you were about how old were you by the time you were like paying your bills?
That was your first marker for success probably like 26
25 26 was when they all started coming together
a lot of money I was making enough money to eat and pay my rent and then
Somewhere around then I did a thing called the MTV half-hour comedy hour. That was a
It was a television show. They had on MTV and each comedian
I mean, I don't know how much time I did on the show
I think you do like seven to ten minutes or something like that wasn't a lot of time and
I had a set and I did on television it went really well and then
Next thing, you know, I got all these offers to do television shows. I got development deal offers and then
Before you know it I'm living in California. It was like that
I mean within a year I was living in California and I was on a sitcom and
And then that sitcom got cancelled and I thought I was gonna move back to New York what's called?
Hardball, it was a baseball show on Fox as a sitcom about a baseball team
That show got cancelled and then I got a development deal with NBC
I was gonna move back to New York, but I had signed a lease
For my apartment. I hated LA I hated actors. I didn't like it
I didn't there was so it was so disingenuous the worlds that I had come from were the worlds of stand-up comedy
which is about as real as you can get either you're funny or you're not and
Then the world of fighting which was even more real than that
and then all the sudden I was around all these people that were just full of shit and
Weird and it was that they were put on these
personas and they wanted the casting agents to like them and the
producers to like them and everything was fake and everybody knew was fake, but they all
Accepted it
and they talked faking me and it was it was very
Very strange very hard for me to deal with I really didn't like actors
I didn't like being and the only place that I sought refuge
It's a funny thing that there'd be an automatic assumption that because you were a good stand-up comedian that somehow you'd be an actor
Yeah to be the same thing
no, they're not but
The thing is that a lot of comedians had gone on to be super successful in the world of sitcoms like Roseanne Barr
Jerry Seinfeld Tim Allen those type of people that had these huge careers Brett Butler
So because of that all that was happening at the same time
This is like in 94 when I got on TV for the first time
and they
That was what they're pushing and then agents and managers have pushed that too because obviously can make tremendous amount of money
So that show got cancelled, but I have leased for this apartment. So I was kind of stuck in LA
so I was like, alright, let me just stay out here and
See what happens for a year?
That was my thought and then I got a development deal with NBC
They wanted to do a sitcom with me and then I wound up
auditioning for a show that they had already had called news radio and that was with Dave Foley and Phil Hartman and maura Tierney and
Tandy Alexander and Stephen Roode and Andy Dick and
vicki lewis and we did that show for five years and then you know by that time I
Had done a lot of stand-up at The Comedy Store when that show was cancelled
fear factor came along and I was touring as a comedian and now that's
There. Okay. So now you go from sitcoms to Fear Factor. So how the hell yeah, and why well, it happened
NBC came up to me with the idea because I was on NBC
Previously and they liked me and then part of the thing was that I didn't want to work with actress anymore
I was I was happy that fear factor was no actors and I was like, oh good. This is easier to do
It's just me talking to people and since I had a background in coaching because I had coached a lot of people at tournaments
In competition and I taught a lot at Boston University. I taught at my own school. I
you know with Taekwondo I was used to teaching people and I was used to encouraging people and
And getting people motivated and I knew how to I knew how to get fired up for competition
I understood you were actually in you were actually one of the rare people in the world who was actually trained
To be the right host for fear factor. Yeah a lot of ways
Luckily fortuitously because I like I would when someone was nervous they're about to do something. I
Could grab them and go look at me you could do this
this is gonna define you with you if you back off right now and you get scared you give in to your fears and your
Anxieties this is going to define you or if you just press forward and realize you can do this and succeed
It will define you in a positive way and you'll build momentum in that direction
You could do this and I would I was really good at giving people pep talks
I was really good at firing people up and it was part of the gig that it was like it was
completely
unexpected because I thought the gig was just gonna be these people do these crazy things and
You know I make fun of it which is part of my job
And I you know
We all cheer and and it would all play itself out because it was a reality show. It was sort of a game show
Slash reality show was like a hybrid
But somewhere along the line, especially when they became really nervous
it was very intense and there was moments where I really
Are one of these people to win and I wanted these people to do their best and one of these people to succeed
You know and to be able to have heard
You know, yeah, that's the basis of psychotherapy
So, you know, it's really something to get people to face their fears. I mean you were doing it in a very
Idiosyncratic way very very
What unique way but yeah
Imagine it was psychologically compelling very often got any particular one got any particular stories from that time
You got a good story from fear factor
Well, there was one time
Where there was this couple not a couple of family
It was a father and a son competing against a mother and the daughter and the father and the son were kind of jerks
Which was part of the competition. There was a lot of trash-talking
but they were really cocky and they thought that they were gonna win, you know, and it was you know, they'd
This the parent and child teams had gotten down to two and it was the man and his son
versus the woman and her daughter and
Everybody thought these jerks were gonna win it were kind of bummed out about it
but the the women the woman and her child
you know, they just roast the occasion and I mean I remember
Talking to them and firing them up, but I still I didn't know if they could do it. What what was the challenge?
It was some crazy thing that they had to climb and do this thing
And the the I I don't really remember all they like that and gather flags and was all for time
but the Sun the kind of jerky Sun the jerky dad, they kept screwing up and they they fucked up because you know
They'd be kind of taking it for granted that they were gonna win
And when the pressure hit them and they knew it was all on the line
a lot of times jerks are just insecure and
When they're under pressure when they're really faced with real pressure like this is the real moment
Who are you really fuck? All that talk? Who are you? Really they fall apart and
The mother and the daughter one and
You're talking about a hardened crew of people that watch people eat animal dicks and jump out of helicopters
for season after season episode after episode, you know, we did it a
hundred and something shows a hundred and I don't even remember how many shows
We got probably 140 episodes of that show
everybody cried
He the camera people I got cry now. I'm thinking about it
Was a mother and the daughter was affecting I mean there's a justice to it, right?
There's a comeuppance
It was a comeuppance. It was an underdog it was
Just seeing
Their spirit, you know when when they were figuring out a way to win
Watching them win but to this day
I'll tell you one of the things this makes me really happy about this interview so far
is that like I have a tendency to tear up in interviews as you may have noticed but this time it was you so I'm
I'm quite pleased about that
You doing
Yeah, yeah, but particularly like that
Sad things I tear up for happy things
You know
That's an interesting thing to think about too because it's not exactly happy right? It's
As you know, when these people come up to me, and they tell me their stories
Often makes me tear up because it's like it's like this blast of dead bloody seriousness with a happy ending, you know, so yeah
It's a comedy
because it's a happy ending but it's rough and affecting and it it it it that makes me tear up and I think my
Proclivity, I've always kind of had that ever since I was a kid but seems to have come back - will you - way?
Oh, yeah. Yeah always always but it's always been happy things. It's never been sad things
It's very hard to get me to cry with sad things
Sighs I sort of just yeah triumph success. Yeah
people pulling through like post-fight interviews when I'm when I work for the UFC, but someone has a
Particularly incredible performance. I have to fight off tearing up. I
Feel so happy for them
This isn't it strange that it's that same response to sorrow
It's the same response to sorrow and triumph
Yeah
You know, like what the hell's up with that? I don't I don't understand that at all. I mean it's also a sign of empathy
Yes, it is. Definitely a sign of empathy but it's what's also odd is that?
with sad things I can I can I
can
Objectively analyze them and I could not get sad. I could understand that
This is just life and it is what it is. And I mean, I won't feel good, but I won't start weeping
I don't weep first like sad things the way I weep for happy things so you that's interesting. So
So in some sense, you've you've trained yourself to detach yourself from that kind of sorrow, but not to detach yourself from triumph
I can rationalize and
Understand sorrow I can internalize it I get it. I know I know what it is. And you know, I
Just get so happy for people sometimes
when things go well, yeah one of my guilty pleasures is are I really like
America's Got Talent and the baby so prevalent. What the hell's the BBC equivalent. Is it the x-factor?
Something like that. Yeah and
It does the same thing to me at sea somebody could slip out there love themselves out there on the stage
Looking pretty pretty damn dreadful in about four different dimensions and then like knock it out of the park. Really? Yeah
It's it's really something to
Scare somebody amazing. Well because I think we perfuming being you realize how hard it is to overcome
Competition or these difficult moments. So these these moments when you're tested and you know
There's fears and insecurities of these people have to battle as well as the actual physical task in front of them
There's so much going on and if there's so much anticipation and nerves and anxiety
Involved in that that to see someone triumph. I mean, it's I am a student of human will I
love
Stories of discipline and success. I don't like bad story
I don't even like going to movies where they're sad, but people tell me about sad movies and like stop
I'm not going that movie. I don't like it. I don't want to see it. I'm not interested
I know what sadness is. I've been sad. I get it. I'm not interested in getting that in a form of entertainment
I like success. I like I like seeing people triumph
I like I like that being the human spirit manifest itself in spectacular ways. Yeah, that's why I like my lectures
That's why it's so fun to do them
You know because I'm out there trying to tell people that they have the opportunity to do that and to point out to them
too that if they watch themselves, they notice they love that because you know, there's other things you go to a
Basketball game or a Hawks game or something like that? Somebody makes a spectacular play and it's little celebration of the human spirit
ability, I don't think impossible in the moment and everybody's up on their feet like
Go
yeah, that's yeah, that's that's
The more that the better as far as I'm concerned, there's so much. Yep
concentration on our on our you know the destruction we wreak on the planet and our original sin and our
Weakness and that you know, the terrible things we do to each other. It's really nice to see those situations where
People are celebrating the triumph of an individual in a group like that and really says something
Wonderful about human beings deep in their core for all of our problems. It's really something I'd be part of that
Yeah, I couldn't agree more and I think we concentrate way too often and way too much on the negative aspects of people
You know
That doesn't happen, you know, it's kind of strange because you do concentrate on the positive in sports
you celebrate the winners, you know, the cameramen don't go over and interview the losers, you know, I mean there and all that but and
It's it I know why it is that in sports
It's okay to just to celebrate the triumphant and the victorious but it is okay and no one questions
its or well, that's not true because now they have like
non-competitive games for kids and you know
That's partly
I think we correct curriculum but most of the Natha most sane people will
Celebrate along with the victorious athlete and that's really something
All right, so fear factor how many years did that last?
Six years, were they good years?
Is good financially?
yeah, well, that's something me I made a ton of money and it
alleviated financial pressure
But I enjoyed doing it some somewhat but it was not like the way I enjoy the other things that I do
It's not like I enjoyed stand-up comedy. It's not like I enjoy working for the UFC
It's not like I enjoy doing podcast all those things that I just talked about those three things
those things are labors of love their passions are things that I'm really
Genuinely fascinated by and interested in like this conversation
I would have this conversation with you if it was just you and me and there was no cameras
I would love to have this conversation. I love having
Conversations with interesting people. I love stand-up comedy. I love all those things
I didn't love being there for fear factor, but it was a great job and I knew it was a great job
But I knew I was really lucky to have it. So it was great in that respect
But when it was over I kind of decided I was done with television when it was over
I was like, okay, I think I'm done with this no more of this from like from here on out
I'm just gonna concentrate on my own stuff and so from then on out
I just really focused on stand-up comedy. And that's when my comedy career really took off was post fear factor
I mean I had a comedy career during pure fact, er
But it really took off post fear factor because I really gave it all of my attention
And so what was what what happened after fear factor that boosted you on the comedies on the comedy circuit?
Well, I did a special for Comedy Central and Spike TV called talking monkeys in space in 2009 that
was like probably my best work up until then and then
You know from then I've been on a pretty steady pace of doing specials every two years or so ever since then, right?
Right, right and that's being successful. Non-stop. Are you getting better? Yeah, and it's yeah, I think I am. I think I'm getting better
I think it's one of those things as long as you keep concentrating on it as long as you keep focusing on it you're getting
Better I think my hour that I'm doing now is as good as anything I've ever done and it's not even done yet
It's only you know, six months into this hour
But I think it's some of my best work ever and was really excited to see where it comes
Well, I mean probably there's no rush because it's only six months since my last one
I probably will work on this friend of the year
before I even think about
Recording it. Oh
Yeah, so it's good
Yeah, it's a let's like a samurai sword
you're folding the metal and hammering the blade and folding the metal and hammering the blade and
You got to know when it's ready and I'll start to get a sense of where it's ready in about a year in about one
Year, then I'll start going. Alright, this seems pretty solid
maybe it's time to rock and roll and then I'll contact Netflix and I'll say
Hey, let's do it, you know
But so set it up and whatever just whatever city I decide and I'll just I'll pick a city. I'll pick it
I'll just run it over in my head. I'll pick a name for it
You know
Well, maybe I'll try to stay posted on what you're doing and come down and see it. That'd be fun
Yeah, I may come last time you're here in Toronto, but I'd like to come and see one of your shows live
I think that'd be a blast
So yeah
Oh, the next was the UFC
Yeah, there was TV Kona UFC happened Morrow's on Newsradio actually wells on dudes radio
I started working for the see way back in 1997
But it was the UFC was more of a sideshow back. Then it was banned from cable. You could only get it on satellite TV
Ran it was it was a freak show people didn't know about it
I mean
I loved it because as a lifelong martial artist to me was fascinating to watch all these different styles compete against each other, but
It didn't pay much money
And even though it was enjoyable for me it got in the way of other aspects of my life. And so I quit around
1998 and then
Somewhere along the line in around
2001 the UFC was purchased by this new company and when they purchased this my earphones are dying
I'm gonna have to take these off and
Unplug this here. Can you hear me still? Is that good?
Yeah
It's good. Okay
Once it started
Once the new company took over they were trying to get people to
to go to their events and
They asked me to go to the event, you know as when I was doing fear factor
and so I went and watched it live and
When I was watching it live
I was talking to Dana White who was the president of the UFC and just talking about the sport and all these different things
I think about and are you interested in this guy? I was asking about various obscure fighters who were competing in Japan
Maybe he didn't know about you try to get these guys and then somewhere along the line
He said hey you want to do commentary and I I can't I was like, I don't want to work man
I'm just here. I just want to enjoy this, you know, he and I became friends and he talked me into doing it and
I first did it for free. I did like 12
Events or so for free just for fun
I was like just get tickets for my friends and I'll go and I'll do commentary for you
But I didn't take it that seriously. I just I didn't everything was going to be you know a career
very baby this
You know
Well-known commentator and mixed martial arts. I thought I was doing it as a favor for them and for fun for me and
You know lo and behold here we are 18 years later. I'm still doing it. I
Presume this paying job
What's up, I presume they're paying you now. Oh, yeah, they pay me a lot. That's good. That's good. That's better bargaining position
I would say yeah
Yeah, it's they're very generous
okay, so
so that that's kind of an understandable transition in some sense because you know
You got you you got your social skills highly developed and you got your ability to be witty on demand
highly developed and to pay attention to an audience and you had the martial arts background and so
You have see commentator that makes sense instead. All right, so now
Where does the podcast come in?
How about how does that happen next? I
Guess isn't it? Yeah the podcast was
2009 I guess when I first started and the podcast was basically
Um, it was just for fun. It was like something to do with my friends me and my friend Brian
we just decided to set up a laptop and
People would ask questions and we would just start
just talking about things and then it became a weekly thing and then we started uploading it to iTunes and then
you know, I started getting guests then as the
I mean it took years before was profitable
I mean, I just it was just for fun forever like a lot of things that I've done
It was originally just for fun. Well, that's pretty early podcast too though a
2009 so very early me podcasts were I mean for lots of people there's still not a thing, although that's really changed in the last
Three or four years. I mean, yeah, there are definitely a
mainstream
media phenomena now, but 2009 I mean
That was that was fringe stuff
Fundamentally. Yes. Yeah. It was very fringe. There was a
Humanizing market at that point I wouldn't have thought not much one office. No, there was no ads we didn't have ads for years
and then
Slowly add started trickling in the first ad was the fleshlight, which is a masturbation device
So it was a funny story about sam. Harris sam harris who was a guest really early on when the fleshlight was the only sponsor
Requested that we not have the fleshlight as a sponsor on the episode that he was on
And so I was like, okay so I took
That week off I just decided no
no sponsor that week and
For very many reasons it's funny video first. Well, you don't pornography leads the way right? Yeah
Well, you know in the internet
Yeah, yeah, it is kind of funny. Yeah, and you know was even also funnier
Is that the guy who was?
I guess he was a CEO of the fleshlight or marketing something or another the fleshlight
He went on to form on it with me
So on it, which is my fitness and supplement company. He and I are partners in this and it came out of our
The thing with the fleshlight our business agreement because it was really profitable for the fleshlight and he realized early on like wow
Like having a podcast sponsor something can be incredibly lucrative see if the podcast is
Well respected and well received like this is sort of an untapped advertising market
Hey, let's start a business and just use the podcast as a method of launching this business and let's see how it goes
great, so the project and that became very successful too, but the podcast sort of
Took on a life of its own it went from being just me hanging out with comedians talking to me interviewing people like you
were having conversations I should say more than interviewing people like you and you know scientists and
archaeologists and
Doctors and I mean everyone world. Oh
You started talking to everyone
Yeah, everyone really everyone it was mostly mostly comedians to begin with. Yes
There was almost all comedians at the beginning and that every one part is interesting because that's something that people
Resist or resent more than anything now like the thing about this that you see now you see this this this expression
Giving someone a platform. How would you give some of someone a platform with those ideas?
It's like it really comes down to this concept of
silencing opinions that you don't agree with and
my thought on it was has always been I want to talk to all kinds of different people and
Even if I don't agree with them, I want to find out why they think the way they yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
Well, there's also an element of useful disagreeable to stairs. Like I'm gonna talk to whoever the hell I want to
Yeah, I don't care what you think about it. I interviewed Marlo speaking of people that you're not supposed to be talking to refilling
Yeah, like a week to go down
So heat from that
Hasn't been broadcast yet. I don't think I don't think I'm going to take a lot of heat for it
You know because it was we didn't have a political discussion
When had I talked about discussion? Oh that big thing
I was really curious about how he got taken down. You know when he's talking about his his his sexual
Abuse when he was a kid and yeah
some sense, like I watched that that interview and I knew he was in trouble as soon as he
Completed it. I figured no you're you said things that you're not allowed to say and I think the part of it was that
see, I was split in two parts watching it part because I was also watching it as a clinician I thought
But it was admirable of Milo to refuse to take the victim stance because he had been such an anti victim
What would you call it? Agitate, er or Advan, right?
And so he said well I was a full participant in this but then the grunting try to be thought no
Man, you haven't updated your memory since you were 14 like you're still thinking of
Adult Milo as 14 year old Milo and you're not thinking about 14 year old Milo as a kid
And so that was sad for me to see that because often when people are traumatized in
Some sense around the area of trauma
They don't mature like it's like they get stuck. Well look
Yeah, imagine that you're on a path and you you you come towards an obstacle that's impenetrable
But you really need to get through it to fully develop like it's part of what you need to grow up
But you can't so you walk around it, you know
but you leave the part of yourself that could have matured behind there and because it didn't deal with the
Challenge like this is sort of what you were experiencing. Maybe on fear factor. Maybe why you're such a
What you saw mostly affected by triumph, it's like you get defeated by something like that. You can't overcome it
there's partying that gets stuck there in a sense and
something Freud observed like a hundred
my damn near must be a hundred twenty years ago that people would
Fixate at a certain age because something had happened to them or at least part of their personality would I could see that happening with?
Milo and I thought that he was in the routing tough spot because he'd be molested
He didn't want to play the victim he yet he actually was a victim which was the person damned thing and that you know
The way he spoke about it could easily have been
Twisted
Misinterpreted partly because of his own doing into a quasi
Justification for pedophilia and then he also said well
You know that this was relatively common practice in the gay community and I figured he'd be cut to ribbons for
Her for bringing that up but he's in the interview. It was really weird, you know
He said that it wasn't the left wingers that took him out
There was the Conservatives
the Miller had because he he was slated to star speak at CPAC and
and the straight Republican types North the Trump types, you know, but but the more
classically conservative Republicans
Didn't think that Marlo innopolis was the right kind of guy to have speaking at CPAC
and so his sense is that it was actually the
More turret right that wiped him out. And so that was WOW
I was interesting and but I didn't expect that and he I we also talked a fair bit about I
Can't tell you all of it because then nobody has to watch the damn podcast but or listen to it, but you know
He's all so
Shifted his viewpoint quite substantially on what happened to him when he was 14, and he he describes the process
he went through to kind of rethink that not least the controversy had caused so, you know, I think
Well, that was our conversation. It lasted a couple of hours it was
You know
I asked him how he was doing and what he was planning on doing and and
and that so that was kind of interesting to find out too but
We never got into anything that was remotely political and so I was happy to have had the conversation
You know to think about people like Marlo is I don't give a damn what you say about them
Alex Jones is the same sort of person. I think the same thing about Tommy Robinson for that matter. It's like
These people are interesting
like there's range people and they have they have an effect on the world and like
What are you supposed to do? Are you supposed to where you're not supposed to be curious about that? It's like
Yeah, it's the deep platforming thing
Like they did they have this idea that you should not have a differing opinion
if you have a differing opinion, it should never get a platform and
More perverse than that even it's the idea that if you give someone like that quote a platform
So now you're willing to talk to them that you must agree with them merely that you're conversing with them and it's like yeah
That and that's a that's a that's all
Well that guilt by association
Assumption is it's a terrible assumption. What does it mean?
You're only going to talk to people hold exactly the same ethical views that you hold on anything whatever yet
It's not sense
it's like that data and society thing that came out connecting everybody is
alright gateways because they've talked to people that are on the right, you know, I
Tweeted that lady when she wrote that I said
That barbara walters interviewed castro. Does that make her a communist and
Basically how I might take on all this stuff is there's nothing wrong with talking to people and I feel like Milo
In a sense. Well Milo, you know almost been his own worst, enemy because he's such a provocateur and now they've turned
that stuff that he was saying as a
Provocateur and they've turned it against him
but I think that
You and him have this one thing in common in that
you get
Categorized by lazy people who are not good at nuance and they put you in this box that other people have created
And this box is oh, this is an all right. This this is a conservative that this guy's a Nazi
This guy's a white supremacist. These guys are that whatever it is. They put you in that box and then
socially
You have to in order to fit into the ideology in order to fit into this group think you have to sort of
Accept these definitions that this person is bad
You know that that person Gavin McGinnis is a Nazi my lowly innopolis would not see that these people with this
These are the problem without any real understanding of who those people really are without any real grounds
I'd have to start going to the cab
By the way, we're launching our
alternative social media platform soon
What going yeah, it's gonna be. Well, we we tried out the first of the technology
I just did debate at Slava Lygia on Friday and last Friday
He was hypothetically the world's foremost Marxist philosopher. Although it turned out that he wasn't really a Marxist at all
He called himself a had a lien
Which is actually way different than being a Marxist and so it wasn't really much of a debate
It was more me attacking the Communist Manifesto for half an hour, which I found rather
rather
Straightforward thing to do and then I was having a rather
Peculiar and productive discussion for about an hour and a half. But anyways and things far tested their technology
So the live stream technology and we've got some cool features that no other platform has
So it'll be a subscription service
And so that's partly what makes it a replacement for patreon to some degree, you know, because we want to build and monetize creators
But we've got new different Terms of Service. And so the central issue with the Terms of Service will be that
once you're on our platform we
Won't take you down unless we're ordered to by a US court of law
That's basically the idea
So we're trying to make an anti censorship
Platform and then we've got there's other features too that are quite cool and unique. So for example
You might be interested in this with regards to your podcast. So
If you listen to your podcast on our platform people will be able to like pick a time in the podcast
like maybe a 30-second clip and just mark it out and then they'll be able to either make a
written comment about it or an auditory comment and then send that to a friend or post it so that then running
continual running
conversations in audio and written form on podcast content
Constant we want to do the same thing for YouTube videos so that people can append
Their own video to any part of a video and then distribute that to their network or also post it so that people can watch
You know so that
We're hoping we can get a real dialogue
We can really add dialogue to the to the podcast end at a YouTube world
We're also going to do the same thing with books. So if you buy an e-book on the platform
You'll be able to annotate publicly. And so what that should mean is that every book that's
Sold on our platform that many people purchase will become the center of multiple
Conversations and we can do that with books that are in the public domain
so for example
One of the books we're going to post right away is Beyond Good and Evil by Nietzsche and I'm gonna start annotating it
You know, and so what what that should mean, you know if you look at the Bible
it's good example people have been annotating it for like five thousand years, right every first has
God books written on it. So it's just this incredibly expanded document that's pulled in
thousands and thousands of people to this collective conversation and this platform should be able to
Allow people to do that with with great works of art and well and then with also with current current affairs and events
And such as well YouTube videos and podcasts and so it's nice looking to it
It's got a fairly professional feel. We're hoping that we'll build a poll
People who are interested in intelligent conversation
Specifically into this platform, you know and maybe start to pull them away from YouTube and some of the less specialized
Channels hoping it's a that that plus, you know, our anti-censorship stansson, but be invitation-only
to begin with so that we can
Well so that we can beta test that make sure the damn thing works and that we're not fooling ourselves about its appeal
so that's come a long ways and
Hopefully I think we've got four or five six people who are interested who are lined up. Ruben is gonna use it
I'm going to use it James all ticker
Chuckle willing Michael Shermer. I think those are oh and and
Carl Carl Benjamin sargon of akkad
It'll be our first
Beta testers fundamentally, we look awesome. Yeah. I'm looking forward to it, man
If if it the bloody thing works
So I'd like to have a conversation with you about it at some point because so for sure I would love to try it
Okay. Okay. Okay. Well, I'll let the let the developer know and
but I think that I think the annotation feature could be really cool and we're also
Setting it up so that if you do comment
Here all the comments will be up and down voted and if your ratio of down votes to up votes falls below
50/50
Then your comments will be hidden people will still be able to see them if they click but you'll disappear
You know from from the Main Street Minh, we don't know if 50/50 is right
We're gonna have to play with that because we're also trying to control
stupid trolling and
I think we're gonna put a minimum length requirement on four written comments
So then you can't just say four words like this guy's a fucking, you know, like no, right
No need that so that you know a minimum comment length is 50 words
You're gonna have to put a little thought into it. Even if you're being a troll. Hopefully your quasi witty troll
so
Anyways, that's the ultimate battle right? It's trying to combat the trolls in some sort of a way or mitigate their their impact
Yeah, well, it's the ultimate battle is to do that without being
censorious right because yeah to express their opinion, but there's a difference between
sasame, but there's a difference between
productive dialogue and and
Provocation without wit
For the price causing trouble
There's so many people out there that are just bored and that's what they use the internet for they're at work
They're in a cubicle all day and they get their jollies out of just fucking with people online
And my producer Jamie he has a friend. Who does that?
I mean this was this friend does he has a bunch of accounts and
He just trolls people he tries to troll celebrities and he tries to get them to respond to him
he says mean things to them and
you know, that's how he
that's how he entertains himself what he's at worst a dark side that
Was manifested to a much greater degree in bill call down
You know now right guys the guy is also depressed
He's also a depressed guy is a failure in life. And you know, is everything you would expect
Yeah, who uses that kind of time for recreation, right?
So, you know the issue with him is like he should take some without him. So if he would admit to himself his aggression
He'd come to terms with it
He could take that damn aggression and he could integrate it into his personality and that would make him able to focus on his life
You know, like you said when he you know, you started your your martial arts fighting
and that you were obsessed and
You were also sick of being pushed around at all of that and you were like willing to do something about it
but obviously and it's obvious just talking to you that the aggressive part of your character is like
Deeply integrated inside of you
It's not high note some corner doing stupid things that you know
You're not paying attention to it's right there at hand and you get a guy like the one you're talking about
He split into meek and depressed and ineffectual on the one hand and cruel and resentful and bitter
Another hmm if those two things would marry, you know
He get half his personality back and and maybe some of his dynamism
So yeah waste of time
I
think a lot of people just feel just
totally powerless and
They feel like this is the only way they can affect others is by reaching out and trolling or saying mean things
I think that
Many people take these terrible paths and lives in their lives which are not productive and they don't they don't feel good about it
They don't they don't respond well to whatever they're doing with their life and they have this constant state of anxiety
It's like Thoreau's quote most men live lives of quiet desperation
Desperation
Yeah
That's what the Internet has allowed this. Yeah, dude, I gotta wrap this up. I got to get out of here
Unfortunately, this is a long wonderful conversation though. Like we always have
You got 30 seconds. Yes, okay
Okay, look, what are you up to next man, like what do you want to have happen you've got this crazy reach
You've got this crazy platform. What's what what's what's on your horizon?
And I just what you're doing. No
No, I just enjoy what I'm doing. I'd like to continue doing what I'm doing. I'm very happy that people enjoy the show
I'm very very happy that it's affecting people in a positive way that they're getting inspiration out of it and they're getting information and entertainment
and education and
It means the world to me. I love it. I love doing the podcast. I love doing stand-up. I love everything that I'm doing
I mean, I'm very very happy with my my career and family life. I couldn't be happier
So I just like to keep doing what I'm doing. I don't have any crazy aspirations other than
Continuing to get better at everything that I try to work at. Yeah
Well, that's that's a crazy aspiration man because you well, you've got a lot of things going for you
You know that are very very unlikely
You know and to and to hope I don't mean to hope that they'll get better but to continue to work to get those better
That seems like sufficient aspiration from my perspective
So low, I think you can work at anything if you work at anything, you're trying to improve and if you there's this
You know, there's always room
There's always room for improvement and everything and there's a personality and your work and everything and that's what I strive for
I strive for improvement. Yeah, well that edge of improvements a good place to be look I wanted also to thank you
Just just so you know what, you know, you're especially that first interview he did with me
That was really helpful to me
and I mean, I've enjoyed all the talks that we've had and and they've been really productive and they they've had a
Law a very big impact on my life
But lots of people have watched them and so they seem to me seems to me that we've had a pretty productive
Series of interactions, but I do you'll do all yourself some. Thanks, and also thanks for coming on this podcast, man
It was really much blood
Matter and I will definitely talk to you about thanks lot
if once we get it going and see that it works because
It's look I didn't have any hope for its success when it first, you know, it was a little ugly baby thing
Because you know, it's too impossible, but it's looking pretty damn good and it's got some cool features
So it'd be nice to have a censorship free platform if we can figure out how to do that
That sounds very exciting. I'm very interested. I can't wait to try it
All right, man
Thank You Jordan hey, thanks a lot
My put it locked. Okay. Good luck with your improvement, and I'm looking like you already special. Thank you. My brother. Take care. Ciao. Ciao