Hello everyone.
 Today is January 15. A few weeks ago, in a conversation with Dave Rubin
 I announced that I would close my Patreon account today,
 so that's what I'm doing, and Dave is or will be soon.
 I'm not happy about this at all,
 Patreon’s innovative service helped me a lot when I first got into trouble for the video
 in which I criticized the Canadian Bill C-16
 on forced speech and compulsory impartiality training policy at the University of Toronto,
 but I think Patreon did not do the right thing in the case of Sargon of Akkad,
 Carl Benjamin, and I think that sets a bad precedent.
 That's it.
 I am actively working on an alternative platform that will compete with Patreon. In the meantime
 i set up a simple alternative without much functionality which is now in the lower left corner of my videos.
 This is for those who would like to continue me or just start supporting me.
 My financial situation has stabilized significantly since I originally made an order on Patreon, and I am
 did in March 2016 to see if I could fund the further development of this Youtube channel on which I do not post and have never placed commercials.
 However,
 it seems that a significant number of people want to show and provide support on a regular basis,
 desiring to give me something in return, for the content provided,
 although I would probably continue to create video content anyway. See all that support
 it definitely encourages me to put YouTube content creation at the top of my priority list,
 and also allows me to continue funding my small team working on an educational online project.
 I’ve said something about it in various past interviews.
 About 5,000 of my patrons have already left the platform in protest
 so I dropped to about half the total number of patrons I once had.
 About 2,500 of them shifted their support to the alternative
 which I mentioned earlier, and an unknown percentage of these 2,500 people are new.
 Thank you very much
 to all mine
 patrons and viewers and listeners and readers for past support, and all those who have redirected
 their contributions to the alternative system.
 Well, let's see how this goes.
 I think I've prepared everything here to delete it.
 Well, let's go.
 Okay, I have to withdraw $ 11 and 21 cents.
 That seems to have happened. Let's see if I can do this now.
 Another step seems.
 That's it, ladies and gentlemen.
 It's night in Switzerland right now where I'm,
 and I tried to log in and it was definitely deleted, I wanted to let you know.
 Thanks again.
 See you soon, I have a few new YouTube videos to post next week
 and I will see those coming to my presentations in California, New Zealand and Australia over the next month.
 Hi everyone.