Hi, guys.
So we’re going to talk about the brain today.
Last lecture I talked to you a little bitabout construct validation and what it means
to measure something and so, we’re goingto take a bit of a detour.
So I told you about measurement problems lasttime.
If you do your measurement properly in psychometrics—ifyou’re studying personality, if you’re
studying individual differences—there areroughly six things that you can discover and
they can be broken up different ways.
That’s the big five model: extraversion,neuroticism, agreeableness, contentiousness,
openness, and they can be subdivided as youshould know because, in principle, you’ve
read the paper that subdivided them into ten.
That turns out to be quite useful, but fornow we’ll just presume that there are five,
and then the other factor of human functionthat’s pretty easy to derive and measure
is IQ.
Now, IQ likely nests under openness becauseopenness looks like it’s something roughly
like intellect which is interest in ideas,but—that’s probably an ability with ideas—but
that’s probably measured better by an IQtest, so if I ask you how smart you are and
you say you’re pretty smart that would giveyou a relatively high score on the intellect
scale, but if I tested your IQ I will geta better measure than that so in some sense
IQ nests inside the big five model.
But you can think about it as a separate thingand I think it’s reasonable to do that so,
you know, it depends on what you’re up tofundamentally.
Now, when the big five was first invented—inventedor discovered, depending on how you look at
it—as I mentioned briefly, as well, it wasbrute force statistics basically, so the idea
behind the big five is that the—it’s calledthe lexical hypothesis—and the lexical hypothesis
is that, because human traits are so importantto us because we want to understand ourselves
and, perhaps even more importantly, we wantto understand other people, and because we
have language, there’s a reasonable probabilitythat we’ve encapsulated the structure of
human personality within our language.
And so, if you analyze the linguistic representationsproperly, then perhaps you can extract out
the central personality features, and that’sbasically what the lexical hypothesis is.
And it’s important to know the lexical hypotheses.
And it’s a bit more sophisticated than thatbecause it basically presumes that you can
extract out relevant information about personalityfrom adjectives—descriptive adjectives—from
phrases and from questions, and you’ll getthe same basic dimensional structure regardless
of which of those techniques you use.
And that turns out to be true for all intentsand purposes.
Now, the lexical hypothesis depends on itsvalidity, depends for its validity on the
initial claim that personality is accuratelyrepresented within the structure of language.
And so one of the things I would say is thatthere’s a weak big five hypothesis and a
strong big five hypothesis, okay?
The weak big five hypothesis is that, insofaras you use language to describe personality,
personality has a five factor structure that’sreliably extractable.
Now the strong big five theory is that, nono, personality has a five factor structure,
and it’s accurately represented in language,but when you pull out the structure from language,
what you’re pulling out is actually representativeof genuine personality.
Now, the weak hypothesis, I would say, isestablished.
And it’s worth knowing because what it meansis that if you invent a questionnaire that
has anything to do with self description,it might be self description at multiple different
levels of analysis, like values for example,instead of just adjectives, or attitudes instead
of just adjectives, I mean, these categoriesare sort of unclear.
What’s the difference between your attitudeand your temperament?
Well, it’s usually defined by the sentencethat you use the words in, right, you extract
out the words, they sort of stand there alone—it’s very difficult to clarify their meaning.
Anyways, the lexical hypothesis I think isone of the most well established—it’s
one of the most well-validated claims in psychology.
I think it may be the most validated claim,apart from maybe the work that has extracted
IQ out from cognitive questions.
And basically it was brute force statistics,you know, people developed different lists
of adjectives and you can complain in someways about how they did it, and we’ll talk
about that a bit later, but, because theytried to throw out evaluative words like good
and evil for example—those aren’t in thebig five—so they tried to only use adjectives
that didn’t necessarily seem to be, like,valued or devalued.
So introvert and extrovert, well, they’reopposites, but is it better to be an introvert?
Is it better to be an extravert?
Well, it’s not obvious so all the wordsthat cover that dimension can be kept in because
there’s no value judgments associated withit and the originators of the big five theory
wanted to keep it as free of values as possible.
Now that’s already a hypothesis right?
It’s a hypothesis that you can come up withan accurate description of human personality
even if you eliminate all the words that areclearly valenced.
And we did an experiment here a while backthat was pretty interesting.
We got hold of a data set of descriptive adjectivesand we put all the evaluative words back in.
So, like nasty and horrible and awkward andcruel, and then the good words as well: moral,
pleasant, uplifting, all those things.
And then we had people rate people they likedand people they didn’t like using that expanded
list and we got a real archetype in some senseof the hateable person and a tremendous number
of the words that were used came from theevaluative dimension.
So I think that when you throw out the evaluativewords you actually throw out a lot of what
people actually use, descriptive words todescribe, because when you like someone or
don’t like someone, if someone’s likeableor unlikeable that’s a pretty important
phenomena.
I mean, you hang around the people you likegenerally speaking and you don’t associate
with the people you don’t like, so it’sa fundamental choice.
But we’ll talk about that later becausethere’s reasons that happened and the reasons
were valid, and it’s not that easy to fixit.
And besides that, the standard five factormodel has all sorts of utility.
But you need to know what its strengths areand its limitations are.
Now, hypothetically, what you do to draw outthe five factor model was you take, imagine
a set of all descriptive adjectives, okay,and then you take a random sample of those
descriptive adjectives, so that it’s notbiased—you’re not going to use all of
them because, you know, if you asked someoneto describe themselves on a questionnaire
using all the adjectives we have to describepersonality they’d be there for like a day.
And so that’s not every efficient.
And so you want to take a random sample.
Maybe you only sample the words that peopleare most likely to use.
So for example if you go online you’ll findthat there are word frequency tables.
You know, most of your language, about 500words covers about 80% of what you say.
You know, and I don’t remember what thelexicon of the typical person is, I think
it’s in the neighbourhood of 3500 words,but that might be wrong, but there’s like
750,000 words in the English language.
It’s an omnivorous language, it just pullswords in from all over.
And so we hardly use any of those words, andyou know, there’s ones that are used extraordinarily
infrequently.
So what you could do is you could look atthe total set of adjectives and then you could
pull out, you know, identify the ones thatare used,, you know, the thousand most frequently
used words and that’d probably cover 95%of the territory, and then you can pick out
a random set of 100.
Then you could administer it to people, andthen you could factor analyze it—you’d
administer it to lots of people—then youfactor analyze it and you get five relatively
clear and stable factors.
And the one that comes out first, it’s thedominant factor in some sense, or the easiest
measure or maybe the best represented in languageor something like that, it’s extraversion
versus introversion.
And the extraversion is a positive emotiondimension.
And it’s associated with enthusiasm andassertiveness.
And assertive people will say, they’ll dominatethe conversation with language.
Or, well basically that’s the way to thinkabout it.
Enthusiastic people, they’re up for anything,you know, they’re the ones they’re always
smiling and telling jokes and having partiesand that sort of thing.
And generally extroverts really like to bearound people.
So they’re happy, they’re gregarious,they’re assertive, they’re enthusiastic,
they’re noisy, they blink more than introverts—nowwhy that is I have no idea, but apparently
they do [student laughter].
So if you notice someone blinking a lot youcan assume that they’re extroverts.
If they’re not conscientious , you knowthere’s this idea of people being impulsive,
it’s a very badly defined term so when youhear a psychologist talking about impulsivity
the first think you could realize is theydon’t know, you don’t know what they’re
talking about because probably there’s nosuch thing as impulsivity.
But extraverted people who are not very conscientioustend to--that's one of the things you might
think about as associated with impulsivity.
There's all sorts of other things though to,so--okay there's a positive emption dimension
and that's extraversion and there's a negativeemotion dimension and that's neuroticism.
And neuroticism seems to break down into somethinglike withdrawal and volatility.
And volatile people are touchy.
So, you know, they'll react quite a lot ifsomething negative happens.
So if you tease them they might get upsetor if you start fighting with them in a sort
of provocative way instead of sort of calmingeverything down, they'll just ramp it up.
And if there's two of you that're volatileand you're having a conversation and the conversation
goes a little bit, you know, into unpleasantterritory, you can really get each other going.
So, yes?
Student: "Is it like, in terms of the hero,like internal states?"
Both.
Both, yeah.
I mean, that's part of the problem with usingthe word emotion because, you know, is an
emotion an internal state or a set of behaviours,and the answer to that is, as far as we can
tell it's both.
So now, I'm going to start talking about extraversionand neuroticism, and part of the reason for
that is because I think the evidence for therelationship between those traits and the
way the brain functions is, in some sense,the clearest.
Now, you remember the big five were extractedout using statistical procedures, right, so
there's no reason to assume necessarily thatthe traits would bear any straightforward
relationship to brain function.
Because they weren't derived from analysisof brain function.
At least not directly.
They were extracted from analysis of linguisticrepresentations of other people's and your
own behaviour.
But it turns out that there's quite a concordancebetween certain elements of neuropsychological
theory and the positive and negative emotionaltraits: extraversion and neuroticism.
And so what I'm going to do today is, I'mgoing to talk to you about how positive and
negative emotion are instantiated in somesense, neurologically.
But I'm going to put that in a broader pictureof brain function because, well first of all,
why not?
And second because a lot of the things I'mgoing to tell you about the brain today will
sort of retroactively shed light on some ofthe clinical theories we've already talked
about.
So, which is nice, you know, because, oneof the ways you find out if something is true,
and this is something we also talked aboutduring the last lecture, is that it manifests
itself even when you use different measurementtechniques.
And so you have statistical derivation, youknow, which basically took place, it really
started to accelerate I would say, first inthe 1960s and then in the 1980s--it made a
big comeback in the 1980s.
But paralleling that were theories of braindevelopment.
And they weren't really--the scientists thatwere doing the one sort of research weren't
really communicating with the scientists thatwere doing the other kind of research.
So they were methodologically separate.
They used different techniques as well.
They weren't talking back and forth much andthey were using different measurement techniques.
So if they both come up with the same thingthen you think, oh well there's probably something
to that because, you know, the sighted peoplediscovered it and the people who could hear
discovered it.
It's the same kind of idea.
So, and you know, this has been worked outin a fair bit of detail over the last 30 years
really.
And so the papers that you're supposed toread with this, they're difficult papers.
I believe you're reading Grey, which is amodel of the limbic system and basal ganglia,
applications to anxiety and schizophrenia.
And I think you have goals and behaviour,that's the Carver&Scheier paper.
I put the Swanson paper in as optional.
That's cerebral hemisphere regulation andmotivated behaviour.
That is a tough paper.
And so is the Grey paper.
And it's partly because these guys, both ofthem, Grey's paper is a distillation of a
very very thick book that's very very difficult.
And that's been written twice.
It was published first in 1982 and then againin 1999.
It's a brilliant book.
It's had a tremendous impact on psychology.
Grey was one of those people who, he was sodamned smart it was just painful.
His reference list--I don't know how manypapers are in his reference list.
Like 2,000.
And one of the really weird things about Greythat makes him stand out among scientists
is, he actually read all those papers.
And more than that, he understood them.
And so that's really something.
And so Grey's book on anxiety--he did a lotof work on animal behaviour and, I'll tell
you, if you want solid psychological informationabout how the brain works, the people you
pay attention to are the people who are studyinganimal behaviour and animal brains.
They know what they're doing.
They're so methodologically careful.
They're very very reliable.
And the human neuropsychologists and the peoplethat use PET scanners and MRIs and all those
things, they're way way way behind the animalresearchers.
Because the animal researchers can just getin there at a lot higher resolution and they
can do much more stringent experiments.
And they tend to be more methodologicallycareful and more scientifically-minded.
So anyways, the Grey book is a brilliant book.
It took me like four months to read that damnbook.
And I mean I really had to take it apart becausehe probably poured 30 years of work into it,
something like that.
He worked a lot in 30 years.
You know?
He did a lot of experimentation and he reada lot and so he built a model of the brain's
function that was based partly on Russianneuropsychology, partly on cybernetic theory,
partly on animal behaviour, partly on neuropsychopharmacology,and so that's the study of how drugs affect
behaviour and cognition, and then partly froma higher order conceptual perspective.
And then he stacked all those things up, oneon top of the other, to make sure that the
picture was the same at every single levelof analysis.
It's absolutely brilliant work and it tookthe social psychologists like--they really
started about Grey, although he publishedhis book in 1982--they probably started thinking
Grey seriously in about 2005.
So it took 23 years for his book to startto make its wide-scale entrance in the more
general psychological community.
Anyways, and so you're going to read thispaper which is a model of the limbic system
and basal ganglia.
And 30 years were distilled into the bookand then that was distilled into this paper.
So you know, it's rough going.
And then the Swanson paper, he's another guy--samekind of guy--he's a developmental neuroanatomist
and if you're really interested in psychologyI would really recommend reading those papers
because they're hard going, but if you getit, you have this substrata of knowledge underneath
you that's really firm.
And I really like Swanson's paper--the guy'sa genius.
And what's so cool about Swanson's paper isthat, if you talk to human neuropsychologists
you'll find that they're biased toward thecerebral cortex.
And they're sort of, I think there's sortof an anthropomorphic pride that goes along
with that.
It's like, well how are we different fromanimals.
Well, you know, we've got thumbs and that'sgreat--hurray for the thumbs--and we stand
upright, but if you look at us neurologicallythe big difference is that we have this tremendously
expanded cerebral cortex, especially the prefrontalcortex, and so then people think--well because,
you know, because that's one of the thingsthat differentiates us from animals and it's
relatively evolutionarily modern, becausethe human brain really really developed rapidly
over the last two million years, that it'slike king of the brain in some sense.
And it's the place where all the complicatedthings happen.
And that's just not right, because like, breathing--that'scomplicated.
That's why you don't get to control it voluntarily.
And keeping your heart going, that's complicatedtoo, and so you don't get to have a decision
about that.
Your brain has made that automatic.
Like millions of years ago because there'sjust no way you're going to get voluntary
control over something that's that vital.
You know, so, assuming that newer brain areasdo more complex things, in some ways I think
that's actually precisely backwards.
It's the old brain areas that've been aroundfor, you know, a hundred million years, those
things are smart.
And that's why they survived for so long andwhy they're distributed in so many different
species.
Your brain is somewhat like a lobster's brain--it'sa lot like a mouse brain.
And it's a lot like a rat brain.
And you might think a rat isn't a very goodmodel of a human, because after all, they're
rats, but one thing I can tell you is thata rat brain is a way better model of a human
brain than your model of human brain is amodel of the human brain.
You know what I mean?
It's like people think of the brain.
Well, they have a dopey model.
Use a rat as an example, of course it's offin some ways because rats can't talk for example,
but there are so many levels of analysis whereyou might as well be a rat, you know?
Technically speaking.
The pharmacology for example is very verysimilar.
The function of the neurotransmitters, thebasic anatomy of the structures.
There's a tremendous amount of overlap.
And so you might as well go for the commonalitiesamong brains before you focus in on the differences,
because in some sense that way you get thebasic architecture right.
Now one of the things that's really interestingabout Swanson, and he's not a neuropsychologist
and he's not really even a psychologist--he'sa developmental neuroanatomist.
And so, there's lots of ways of chopping upthe brain, you know, to look at it, because
it's a really complicated thing.
It's like saying, well how many ways can youdivide up a city to analyze it.
Well, there's endless number of ways thatyou can divide up a city to look at it.
It's the same with the brain because it'sinfinitely subdividable, in some sense, certainly
all the way down to the molecular structures.
And then even at higher order levels, youknow, because it's so complex and it's hierarchically
structured you can just divide it up in allsorts of different ways and so, at higher
levels of resolution there isn't even thatmuch agreement on how to name the parts.
Now, what the developmental neuroanatomistsdo is that they look at how the brain develops
in utero over time.
Because it's a developing thing that sortof unfolds like a flower unfolds, you know?
And you can track which part of the earlybrain turns into the later brain and you can
get some sense of the--it's like an evolutionarytree you know?
If these three parts grew out of this partthen you can assume that there's some commonality
between them.
And that can also help you figure out howto divide up the brain.
And so that's one of the things that Swansondoes.
But the other thing he does that I reallylike is that, instead of looking at the brain
from top down which is what human neuropsychologiststend to do because they concentrate on say
language and higher order cognitive functions,which we think of as complex but you think,
they're not that damn complex, you know, likea computer can do mathematics so much better
than you that there's not even any comparison,you know.
And it won't be very long before a lot ofthe things that we think of as abstract cognition
are things that computers are going to beable to do.
They just won GO tournament, for example.
And the computers are now better--even yourPC is better at playing chess than probably
anyone in this room.
And the really high end computers are betterat playing chess than anyone who lives.
And so computers are catching up damn fast,but you'll notice that they don't do things
like bus tables in restaurants, because itturns out that's really hard.
[Student laughter] Well, I mean think aboutit.
It's hard.
You're carrying different sized loads allthe time.
You have to interact socially with peopleproperly.
You have to stay the hell out of the way.
You have to exactly time when you're goingto come to the table.
You have to move extraordinarily efficiently,especially as the place gets busy.
You know, there's a lot of demands on youto do that job effectively.
And you know, we think about it as a low endjob but it's not automated.
The low end jobs are the ones that are goingto be automated first.
And it's not obvious that they're going tobe the things that we associated with low-end
labour.
It's just that--well.
Now, what Swanson did with the nervous system--Iwas so happy when I found this paper because--he
did exactly with the nervous system what Piagetdid with children.
He showed how the nervous system builds itselffrom the bottom up.
And so Swanson lays right on top of Piaget--it'slovely.
And then the other thing that Swanson doesvery very nicely is, he elucidates a lot of
the Freudian presuppositions.
So Freud of course talked about the id, andthe id is this, it's sort of like the archaic
brain in some sense, you know.
It's where all your primal impulses lurk.
And you know he called that one thing theid.
Well you might say, well is there an id inthe brain and the answer is, well, vaguely.
Vaguely.
The brain does differ in terms of the ageof its subcomponents.
And as you go deeper into the brain and closerto the spine, the brain areas get phylogenetically
older, and the more phylogenetically olderareas of the brain, which are underneath the
cortex, they have their own little circuits.
And there's some commonality between them,and they do govern primal--I think of them
as primal sub-personalities.
We've talked about that before.
It's better than thinking about them as drivesor goals or anything like that because not
only do they--they're like sets of associatedbehaviours, but they're not just that.
They're also ways of looking at the worldand ways of thinking about the world.
So, you know, if you're angry, it's not likeyou're being driven to use your fists.
That's not how it works.
What happens is that the angry subpersonalitycomes out and, you know, it does a whole bunch
of things.
It's got its own state of arousal.
It's characterized both by positive and negativeemotion, which is something that's quite peculiar
about anger, because it's both a defensiveaction and an aggressive, forward moving behaviour.
And it has a viewpoint.
Like it's a biased viewpoint.
If you're angry with someone, all you cansee about them is how damn irritating they
are and how much they need to be defeated.
You know, roughly speaking.
And so it's a whole personality.
Now, it's a one dimensional personality becauseall it's really got is anger, and that's not
enough to solve every problem.
But you can't think about it as a drive exactlybecause it's not deterministic.
You know, even when you're angry, you havea range of choices to make.
Now, they're circumscribed by the fact thatyou're angry, but it's best to think about
it as a sub personality.
I think you just get a lot farther that way.
Now, what Swanson did--you know how Piagettalked about children/infants, they start
out with a few fundamental reflexes, right,that they're sort of born with, including
the ability to use their mouth and their tongueas an exploratory device.
And then they have certain reflexes that theycan manifest right away, and then they have
the ability to modify those reflexes.
And so, as far as Piaget was concerned, thatwas enough to get the ball rolling.
It was sort of like the child was like bootingup across time.
It's got some, you know, outside of the operatingsystem you've got some bare processes in your
computer that get it started enough so theoperating system can turn on.
It sort of unfolds up into something complex.
Well that's sort of what human beings do acrosstime.
They start out with these basic reflexes thatare simple movements and then they earn how
to modify the movements and then they learnhow to chain the movements together and then
they learn how to use the chained movementsas tools, in some sense, as embodied tools,
to allow these biologically determined sub-personalitiesto operate in the world with some chance of
success.
Okay, now you can layer that onto the nervoussystem, so part of what's happening when you
get these basic movements down, the ones thatare not automatic like your ability to grip
and the ability to do this with your handsand all the basic subroutines you have with
your body--those are automatized, they'remade into little machines, and a lot of them
run spinally.
You know, because what you think in some senseis that, if you're walking, you're thinking
about walking in some way--that's how youwalk.
And it's like, that's not right.
What happens is your orient yourself to agoal, and in some sense you just disinhibit
the system that knows how to walk.
And then it more or less does it automatically,and you know, you direct it.
And you can modify what it's doing if there'san error.
But you kind of know that, right?
You drive to school or you drive somewhereyou're familiar to, you don't even necessarily
remember the drive if you've done it 50 times.
It's because you're basically--in some senseyou're just sequencing automated behaviours.
And, a good thing too because, if you didn'thave those automated expert behaviours at
hand, you wouldn't know how to drive.
Because, you're just not smart--the time thatyou drive most consciously is when you first
learn how to drive.
Well, you don't want a conscious driver, youwant an unconscious expert driver whose consciousness
is monitoring the world for anything unexpected.
That's what you want.
So, and that's the case with almost everythingyou do.
If you have to become conscious of what you'redoing, the probability that you don't do it
very well is really high.
And you know that because maybe you're talkingto someone, it happens when I'm lecturing
sometimes--if I'm not really on top of thingsI'll get self-conscious--and that's a terrible
thing to have happen when you lecture, youknow, it just makes you stumble.
If it's going well I know where I'm goingand I have all these little routines that're
stories and things that I know that--theyjust automatically sequence.
All I have to do is point the lecture in theright direction and, you know, the things
that are logically associated with the directionof the lecture will--they'll come up.
They're primed in some sense.
And so, Swanson helped me understand the functionsof the lower part of the brain quite well
and then to map that onto Piaget.
And one of the things he helped me understandwas just exactly how sophisticated the lower
parts of the brain are, the more automaticparts.
Now, the behaviourists used to believe that,or did believe and still believe to some degree,
that a lot of your behaviour is reflexive.
And the radical behaviourists, the guys fromthe 50s, more or less made that case that
even complex behaviour among animals is nothingbut the chaining together of automatic reflexes.
So it was a deterministic chain of reflexes.
Well, you do have reflex actions, you know,so if you touch a hot stove you'll jerk your
hand away, and your brain isn't involved inthat--it's just your spinal cord that's involved
in that.
Now, your brain is involved when the painhits, and maybe that's so you stop doing it
in the future, but the conscious part of yourbrain is too slow to get your hand away from
the stove in time.
And so, what's happening in your body in somesense is that you have these multiple layers
of neurological organization and some of themare quite fixed--they're automatic deterministic
systems and those are things you've reallyreally practiced and that you can just can
run as a routine.
And above that are those things that you'vechained together, but they can be chained
together in different ways so they're lessautomatized.
And then if you keep going up they get moreand more complex and less automatized, until
at the top, which is where your consciousnessis, roughly speaking, you have to program
what you're doing, you know.
You have to pay very careful attention tohow to go about doing this because you don't
have the systems built into you.
So you know what that's like if you're tryingto learn something new, it takes a lot of
energy and you really have to pay attention.
And then once you start to get it, well, whatreally happens is there's things you don't
have to think about any more.
And thank god for that, because first of all,you can't think that much because you're a
limited capacity processor, and second, theprogramming is quite difficult.
Okay so 
if you look on the right there, there's alittle diagram that's a hierarchical--or a
little table really and it's talking aboutthe motor system.
Now the motor system is what allows you tooutput action.
And you're outputting action at all sortsof levels that you don't even realize because,
you know, you might think that sight is asensory activity, for example, but there's
a very tight relationship between sensoryactivity and motor activity.
So, for example, when you're looking at ascene, even though you don't know it, your
eyes are going like this.
And the reason you're going like that is becauseif you held your eyes absolutely still, and
you can actually learn to do this, if youhold your eyes absolutely still your vision
will fade right out and you won't be ableto see anything.
And it's because the little retinal cellsthat are picking up the light get exhausted
and then so they stop transmitting.
And so part of the reason you're zipping youreyes back and forth is so that different parts
of your eye can process the scene and it doesn'tget exhausted.
And plus, you're also looking around and you'relooking at when things move, you know, you
direct your attention to that, or if someonemakes a gesture.
And so, you're actually kind of using youreyes like tentacles, you know, to check out
the information that's coded in the light.
And even when you hear and that sort of thingthere's a fair bit of motor activity associated
with it--you turn your head unconsciouslyand there's all sorts of little motor actions
in your ear that also help you tune in, andso those things are tightly associated.
But roughly speaking, the motor output isaction.
And then Swanson shows that there are theselayers in the nervous system that go from
the spinal cord upward.
The first ones are the somatomotor neuronpools, and the second are locomotor pattern
generators, and the third are locomotor patterninitiators and then the forth are locomotor
pattern controllers.
It's a hierarchy.
And so, the way to kind of lay Piaget on it,in some sense, is to think of the somatomotor
neuron pools as simple actions that can beimplemented automatically.
And then the locomotor pattern generator hastaken those simple actions and chained them
into relatively more complex melodies of action,so kinetic melodies, and then the locomotor
pattern initiator more or less decides whenthose kenetic melodies should be implemented.
And even that can be unconscious.
So it's still at that level of brain organization,it's still more or less automatic.
Even stimulus-response is a way to think aboutit.
And then you go one level higher and that'swhen you get the ability to voluntarily use
these automated things.
So I can show you an example of how this works.
This is called a ballistic movement.
So, I'm going to take my hand and I'm goingto bring it down really fast right toward
that edge.
Okay so--alright now, so that's very fastmovement.
Now one of the things that's cool about thatmovement is that I don't have time, once that
action starts, it happens so fast that it'sdone by the time that the information about
that action actually gets to my brain.
Once I let that go, I can't control it.
What I basically am doing is disinhibitingthe motor control systems that I already have
established in my psychophysiological being.
I'm disinhibiting one of those and then itruns automatically.
And so that's what you're doing all the timewhen you're acting in life.
It's kind of a neat--I wrote a paper a whileback with an undergraduate student of mine,
he was a pretty bright character, and we gotinvited to do a paper--I got invited to do
a paper--on free will, and so we were thinkingabout free will and, it's very interesting
to think about free will in relationship tothese hierarchies because it sort of goes
like this: it's that, out there in the future,you've got free will.
But as the future moves towards the present,you don't.
Once it gets close enough to the present youhave to have initiated something automatic
that will happen.
And so I can give you an example.
People who play the piano very well, theylook ahead of where they're playing in the
music.
Because they know how to do this, they don'thave to think about it.
What they have to do is look ahead so thatthe part of them that knows how to do this
gets ready to do it.
And all of you are experts in that way likely--allof those of you who drive--you're also experts
that way.
Because when you're driving, where do youlook?
If you're a good driver, on the highway, youlook at least half a second or a second ahead.
Why?
Well because 50 feet ahead has already happened.
Right, it's too close in time for you to doanything about it, so basically what you're
doing is you're looking at the road and thenyou're disinhibiting sequences of actions--the
ones that are going to correspond to whatyou want to do with the road most adequately.
And the closer you get to executing one ofthose motor behaviours, the more automated
it is.
SO by the time you manifest the action, there'sno free will there at all.
But you set it up to be released in some sense.
So I can say, well, there's no free will inthat, but there was in deciding to do it at
that point.
So and that's sort of how your automaticitymeets your freedom.
You've got to think about it as somethingextending across time.
Okay, so having established that then we'regoing to get into the neurological localization
a little bit.
So you might say, well you collect all thesepatterns of behaviour and then you automate
them into routines.
I can give you an example, so, for a child,you know, when a child is first born, if you
tap on its cheek it'll go like this.
It's called a rooting reflex, and it'll moveits mouth and tongue.
Well what it’s doing, roughly speaking,is its searching for a nipple, and if you
just put your finger there it'll clamp ontothat and start to suck.
And so the child comes out with that ability.
And that's a reflex, it's sort of built intothe neurology.
But then when the child starts to interactwith the mother to actually breastfeed, well
then that initial reflex has to be modifiedquite substantially in the context of the
relationship with the mother because the barereflex, it's enough to get the thing going
but it's not enough to make it work.
And so often mothers take a fair bit of timeto learn how to breastfeed, but it's also
because the baby is taking a fair bit of timeto learn how to do it.
So they have to establish the dance that goeswith that.
And one of the things that's quite cool aboutthat dance, so to speak, is there's been studies
done of depressed and non-depressed mothersinteracting with their infants.
And so if you take a non-depressed motherinteracting with her infant and you just film
them, and you speed up the film, you can seethe baby reacts and the mother reacts and
the baby reacts and the mother reacts andit's like a dance, you know, there's this
continual flow of information between thetwo of them.
And if the baby's with a depressed motherthat doesn't happen.
It's jerky and discontinuous.
And so if you think about that you can seehow the dialectical interaction between the
mother and child is building up the child'srepertoire of complex abilities--within a
social context.
I know I told you guys before, roughly speaking,that kids really get socialized to play with
each other between two and four.
But that's not exactly true because even atthe lower level, more automated, and more
primordial reflex behaviours, like the onesthat are associated with breastfeeding, even
those develop under the constraints of socialguidelines.
So society's always there, right from thereflex level up.
But you know what happens when kids are betweentwo and four, they have to learn to actually
play, they have to learn how to play complexgames with other children and so that involves
communication and negotiation at a verballevel.
And also with people their own age.
So you know, it's continuous in some senseand discontinuous in another sense.
Okay so anyways, you might say well why doyou bother stringing all these things together,
and well, you think about the breastfeedingissue.
Why does a baby bother to learn how to breastfeed?
Well, that's pretty obvious isn't it.
I mean, first of all, if it doesn’t thenit doesn't live.
And there's a bunch of reasons for that--oneis obviously it's not going to be nourished
properly, although, there are things you cando to substitute for that.
Although still, breastfeeding still seemsto be the best thing you can do for your baby.
Although, you can work around it, but fundamentallyit seems to be the best thing you can do.
But then the baby's also learning all sortsof other things, like it's got skin-to-skin
contact and it's snuggling and it being comfortedand doing eye gaze to eye gaze and it's cooing
and the mother's imitating it and there'sjust a lot of things going on there.
And so the child is organizing all that, partlyto fulfill a basic biological need, which
is two needs, both thirst and hunger, butit’s also fulfilling its need for play,
for example, because children have a circuitfor play.
So you could say play is part of the id--it'sa fundamental biological need.
The other thing children have to have is skin-to-skintouch--they'll die without it, it's not optional.
You even see that in rats.
So if you take a rat pup away from its motherand you feed it, but you don't do anything
with it, it just dies.
It goes into opiate overdose roughly speaking--itsgastrointestinal systems shut down--and then
it dies.
And you can stop that from happening by isolatingit, feeding it, and then like massaging it
with the eraser end of the pencil--you cankeep the rat pup alive.
And Jaak Panksepp was one of the people eitherdiscovered that or worked on it, and that
word was extended by Tiffany Fields in a hospitalin Florida--some really brilliant work.
She was looking at Panksepp's work on thenecessity of tactile stimulation and she thought,
hey I bet we could try that with prematurebabies.
Because if a baby's premature, a couple ofthings are problems.
I mean, first of all, at the need of the term,pregnancy term, that's when babies lay on
fat.
You know, so they come out and they've gotsome storage there in case things don't get
going very well.
And they're gaining a lot of weight in thatlast period of pregnancy, so if they come
out premature then they're really skinny.
And then what happens often is they startto lose weight and that's not good because
they should be ramping up the weight gainreally quickly.
A newborn baby will outgrow its clothes inone week, you know, they're gaining weight
quickly.
The premature babies lose weight, and it'shard to keep them going.
They put them in an incubator, they feed them,but what Tiffany Field did was, she had the
nurses go in there with gloves and massagethe babies for three minutes ten times a day.
And those babies gained weight as fast asbabies that were still in utero and you could
still detect the differences in their developmentsix weeks later.
Which in baby terms is like forever, right.
I mean you change as much from zero monthsto six months as you probably do from six
months to 20 years old.
It's such a radical transformation.
Okay, the reason I'm telling you all thisis because, you lay out these hierarchies
of behaviour that are well practiced and automatizedand brought under the control of social conditioning,
but you really do them in the service of--wellthat's the question.
In the service of, we'll say, biological necessity,for the sake of argument.
Well you have to eat and you have to drink,and so one of the reasons you lay out the
hierarchy that's associated with breastfeedingis so that you can do that directly, but also
so that you can establish a relationship sothat not only are you doing it directly this
day, but you're also going to do it tomorrowand the next day and the day after that.
And so the hunger system is integrated withthese other systems of biological constraint
in some sense, and they're trying to comeup with an answer to the continual problem.
So you have dedicated biological systems thathelp you address problems that are associated
problems that are associated with your biologicalnature that are universal.
And those would be the things that Freud woulddescribe as the id.
So you can think of these hierarchies of motorbehaviour, which sort of develop up into sub
personalities, as nested in some sense insideof motivational states.
So there's the motorbehavious hierarchy thatyou use when you're angry, there's the motorbehaviour
hierarchy you use when you're distressed--andkids get very good at that, you know, so they'll
cry, which is a reflex, but by the time they'reabout two, they're pretty damn good at crying.
You know, they've got a cry that sounds likethey're sad and upset when they're really
angry.
And so if you really listen you can hear thedifference.
Because an angry baby sounds different thana sad baby.
But if you don't listen, the baby will haveyou thinking it's sad no problem.
Then you'll feel sorry for it and go helpit out, and really it's just thinking "up
yours" [Student laughter].
So we know this partly because--so let's sayyou've got a baby and it's under nine months,
six months old, and it's crying in its crib.
You think, well what should you do?
You go in there and you pick up the baby andyou comfort it and you probably do that pretty
much non-stop when the baby's that young becausethey're so young they should really still
be in utero--they're very young.
But by nine months that baby's starting toget smart.
And so it's about nine months when it canvisually recognize people it knows and people
he/she doesn’t know.
And then, so the baby's in there and it'ssquawking a bit and so, it wants some attention,
and then someone walks in and it's not themother.
And the baby bursts into tears and peoplethink the baby's all sad because its mother
didn't show up.
It's not sad, it's really irritated that thewrong person showed up.
And you can tell that because people havedone facial coding of the baby's expression
and also its skin tone and an angry baby looksangry.
First of all it turns all red, it's reallyangry.
And you see that behaviour later too in tempertantrums.
Like a two year old that's having a tempertantrum is just having a fit of rage.
The rage system, because there is a rage system,is just completely out of control, it's just
absolutely dominating their behaviour.
You don't really want to encourage that becausethe rage system should start to be modulated
by other systems and other higher order controlsystems.
Not so much suppressed or repressed whichis sort of how the Freudians would think , but
integrated into more complex and sophisticatedmodes of action, so the child can use its
anger--which is an extraordinarily usefulcapacity, because it allows you to defend
yourself--so the child can learn to use thatin a sophisticated way so it can solve the
problems that would lead to a rage attackwithout ever getting to the point where it
has to be enraged.
That's a functional child--it's not like it'slearned to repress its anger, it's just that
it gets along with people and never has toget angry.
So, now some kids learn to repress their angerbecause they're in a household where any manifestation
of anger is dealt with very very harshly.
And maybe there's a rule that everyone hasto be nice to each other all the time, or
else.
Sort of a paradoxical rule.
But anyways, you can imagine there's a lotof these biological systems and so I want
to show you some of their instantiation here,so let's look at this one.
When you get up above the spinal cord, there'sa little brain area, I'll show you about how
big it is.
There it is.
So there's your brain, the top-on part, thepart on top, that's the cerebral cortex.
That's the part that people are really proudof.
It's like, oh wow, look at our cerebral cortex.
Doesn't it have a lot of neurons [studentlaughter].
Then, in the middle there, there are olderbrain area--phylogenetically old--and then
as you go down toward the spinal cord theybasically get older and older and older and
older.
And more and more critical to your development.
So the serotonin system, we talked about ita little bit in lobsters, right.
The serotonin system determines where a lobsteris in a dominance hierarchy, it determines
whether it stands like this or whether itstands like this.
That's an old system.
And when your brain is developing in uteroit's the serotonin system that guides its
development.
So that's how important it is, sort of likethe conductor of the orchestra, but it's also
the thing that controls the entire unfoldingof the brain.
And it's a really really archaic system, soin some sense your being is controlled by
these things that are ancient, beyond comprehension.
Anyways, you look at the hypothalamus andyou think, well that's not very big.
And yeah, it's not.
But, if you take a cat and you--so a cat brainlooks something like that--if you take off
all the stuff that's in light orange and mostof the top of the stuff that's above the hypothalamus
that's in white--you just take all that out,and it's a female cat and it's in a cage--you
really can't tell the difference between itand a cat that has all the rest of that brain.
Now there's some things it can't do.
It doesn't do very well if you take it intoa new situation because it can't learn.
More importantly in some sense, it can't remember.
So it's in a perpetual sense of everythinghappening for the very first time.
But it's still capable of a lot of the reactionsthat would be necessary for you to stay alive.
SO it can regulate its liquid intake, it canregulate its food intake, it can react sexually,
it's capable of defensive aggression, althoughit'll really fly into a rage so it's kind
of like a disinhibited two year old in somesense.
And as long as you keep it in the cage andprovide it with food and water it's like the
way it lives.
And it's hyper exploratory which I think isjust weird beyond belief.
You know, you take the brain off a cat andthen all it wants to do is explore.
Which is not what you think at all.
It's like, a cat with no brain is really curious--itjust doesn't make sense.
But it does actually because the systems thatdrive your exploratory urge are rooted in
that hypothalamus and they're actually thesame systems--it's individual differences
in the functions and sensitivity of thosesystems that are in part associated with individual
differences in extraversion.
So extroverts are sort of hyper exploratoryin social situations.
Whereas introverts aren't.
And the exploratory circuit that has its originsin the hypothalamus runs on dopamine, roughly
speaking, and then it runs through the baseof your brain and then up into your prefrontal
cortex in particular.
And it's also the system that responds tococaine and amphetamines and other drugs that
people like to take because they heightenpositive emotion.
So it's variability at a very very low levelin the brain that determines things like the
differences in extraverts and introverts.
Anyways, it's this tiny little part of thebrain and if that's all you have you can get
along not too bad.
But that's also because it's tiny from onelevel of analysis, but it's really big from
another.
I mean, you can increase your resolution whenyou're doing brain analysis all the way down
to the molecular level and still be lookingat the brain, you know.
Below the molecular level, at the atomic level,well everything's made out of atoms.
But the brain is already there at a molecularlevel and it's insanely complicated at a molecular
level, and the hypothalamus is way biggerthan a molecule.
And so even though it's small compared tothe rest of our brain it's still a whopping
big structure by atomic standards and so there'sa hell of a lot going on down there.
And you notice the hypothalamus, you mightsay, is there such a thing as the id.
Well, yes and no.
Is it in the brain?
Yes and no.
A really low resolution representation ofwhat's in the brain, that's one way of thinking
about it.
But then you might say, is there a hypothalamus?
And the answer to that is, well, yes and no.
Because there's the hypothalamic structure,and you see it's made out of a bunch of things
that are different.
And so you could say, well should you evengroup those things together.
And the answer to that is, it depends on whyyou're grouping them together.
If it's useful for some purpose of understandingor control, to group them together--they're
similar in the way that they emerge in thecourse of brain development, and they're roughly
of the same phylogenetic age--but there'slots of reasons to treat them as the same
and there's lots of reasons to treat themas different.
It depends on what you're trying to do.
Anyways, the hypothalamus has all these littlesub-structures that are really in some sense
at the core of the sub-personalities thatwe talked about.
So, for example--okay so this is Swanson againand he's showing you--this is a rat's brain
from the bottom--and he's showing you thelayout of the hypothalamus.
You see it's got all those different nuclei.
It doesn't look like one thing, it looks likea bunch of things.
And so here he says, the descending paraventricularnucleus is involved in the control of eating
and drinking, and that's shown in green.
So that's the thing that--when you get hungryor thirsty--that's the thing that sort of
turns on your hungry and thirsty sub-personality.
And then the rest of the cell groups playa major role in controlling two classes of
social behaviour, that is, behaviours involvinginteractions between animals: reproductive--that's
the red areas--and defensive--the purplishareas.
So now what you can think is, you have allthose little subroutines that we talked about,
that're sort of at hand and ready to go, andthen they're organized underneath these major
classes of motivation so that, you have todo something--like eat--and so it's like there's
an eating robot in you, that's one way ofthinking about it, except it's smarter than
that and it's alive and conscious.
These things are alive, they're not machinesand they're not deterministic.
You can think of them as low-resolution personalities,or uni-dimensional personalities because the
only thing the eating system really caresabout is whether or not you eat.
And the drinking system is the same thing.
You know, you see malfunctions sometimes inpeople of these singular systems, so you can
develop a condition if you have hypothalamicdamage where you'll drink water til you die
and no one can stop you.
They can lock you in a room away from sinksand that would stop you, but you'd be raging
away inside trying to claw through the doorto get to the damn water because you're so
hyper-thirsty that it's all that there isleft of you in some sense and if you're allowed
access to a tap, you'll just drink and drinkand drink and drink and drink until you drown.
And, you know, people can say, hey you'vehad enough water--it's like, forget that.
The hypothalamus is a major league system,and when push comes to shove, it's the thing
that's in control.
And one of the ways of thinking about theway that you organize your life is that, the
hypothalamus controls the major motivationsystems--we just talked about those--and so
those are the things that people would thinkabout as drives.
Although they're not drives, they're too complicatedto be drives.
And then there's other systems that come uplater that we'll also talk about that govern
emotion, like anxiety and a different systemthat governs pain.
Partly what you're trying to do as your organizeyour life is to make sure those systems stay
shut off.
And then you think, well I'm in control.
Well no, you're not.
You just satisfied all the things that couldtake control from you, and so now you have
a modicum of choice.
And basically what you're doing when all thesethings have had what they need is you're running
around exploring.
You know, and that's also another one of thesecircuits because the hypothalamus, as I already
said, governs exploration.
So, a lot of--see, psychologists often getthings backwards and they ask silly questions
like why are people anxious.
That's a stupid question.
It's why are people ever calm--that's a question.
Why are you anxious?
Well, hmm, think of all the terrible thingsthat can happen to you.
And they will happen to you, even worse, andthere isn't anything you can do about it.
It's like why aren't you quaking in your bootsjust sitting there.
Well, that's a mystery.
You know, and then, here you are in your normalstate--it's like, well no, this is not a normal
state.
People have been trying for seven millionyears, as people, to create a situation so
complex and comfortable that a couple hundredof you can sit here without having your hypothalamus
driving you toward something and actuallyjust listen to something for a few hours.
That's not normal.
That's so staggeringly abnormal that it'sa miracle.
The typical person--and for most of humanhistory--it's like, you are hungry, man.
And that's not the same.
Like you people--well some of you have probablybeen hungry in your life, but--is there someone
here who's gone without food for more thanone day?
Okay has anybody here gone without food formore than a week.
Okay, how about three days?
Okay, so like, are you hungry?
No.
You're hungry when you haven't had anythingto eat for twenty days, then you're hungry.
And the same goes for thirst and cold andall the things we're just never exposed to.
So we think civilized people are all calmand nice and easy to get along with, it's
like, yeah well you have absolutely everythingyou need all the time and that makes you as
easy to get along with as any completely insaneprimate ever gets.
Okay, so you might say, well god, if you cansurvive with just the hypothalamus, what good
is the rest of the brain?
And the answer is, well, if you're thirsty--let'ssay you're angry, the hunger system isn't
going to be able to take care of that, right.
So you're hungry, okay, that works.
You're angry, that works.
But then you have another problem, which isyou're hungry now and you're angry now, perhaps,
you can move through those states.
If you watch that, you'll see that in twoyear olds--it's part of why they're so fun
to be around.
First of all, they're really excited and they'rerunning around playing and then they trip
and they're crying like made and then youpoke them and they laugh and then they want
something to eat and then they fall asleep[student laughter].
You know, they're just run by their hypothalamusand it's really fun to see because they're
so alive and so enthusiastic and spontaneous,but they're completely clueless.
It's like, you take one of those creaturesto the mall and leave it there and it's just
not happy at all.
And the reason for that is, well it doesn'tknow how to sequence any of its actions, right.
It runs through these states of need, butit isn't complicated enough to figure out
how to address those needs in any consistentsense across multiple environments in a social
world.
You need the rest of your brain for that.
And that again fits in with the Piagetianidea--is that what you're doing is you're
taking these micropersonalities that are basicallyinstantiated within the hypothalamus and then
you're organizing those into more and morecomplex games.
And you need the cortex to do that becausethe cortex is partly what enables you to think
about time.
You know, because the hypothalamus, it's ahere and now thing.
The hypothalamic cat lives in the present--there'sthe present, and that's it.
You can probably get some sense of that--likeone of the things that happens to people if
they take amphetamines or if they take psychedelicdrugs is that some of the inhibitory control,
some of the more complex control systems thatare cortical, shut down.
And so then they enter a state where it'sall now and you know, the now just comes at
people in that state.
It's a transcendent experience, but of course,despite that, you're not functional.
And so in some sense you trade that transcendentrelationship with reality for a narrow functionality.
And that's too bad and that's life, but it'sa tradeoff.
So anyways you're organizing these sub-personalitiesand you're using your cortex to do that because
you don't just have to think about eating,you have to think about, how am I going to
get the food?
When is the food going to come?
How am I going to cook the food?
What about all the other people that wantto eat?
How do we regulate that in our family?
And then how do we regulate that with thefact that we also need to sleep and we need
to work and we need to get along with otherpeople and we need to have something interesting
to do and--it's ridiculously complicated.
And there's no end to the complication because,maybe you're just solving the problem for
you, and then you're two.
Or maybe you're trying to work it out withinyour family.
Well then that's sort of like the Crumb brothers,they never get out of their family because
they never come to an arrangement that workswell enough so that they can, in some sense
move into the broader world.
Then you solve the family problem but thenyou've got the tribe problem and, maybe you
can solve that to some degree, but then youhave the broader political problem and it's
like--there's an infinite problems that cropup for you to solve so there's plenty for
you to do with your big cortex.
And you know we paid a big price for thatthing because once we discovered time, we
can make a bargain with the future, whichis basically what you do when you regulate
your behaviour, right.
You're making a bargain with the future.
You say to yourself, if I forego so and sonow then, later, it'll pay off.
And that's real useful.
You can conceptualize the future, and youcan conceptualize the future as something
you can bargain with.
But there's a lot of cost to that.
One is you don't get to do just what you wantright now, and of course that sucks--it's
partly why people drink alcohol.
Because alcohol is disinhibiting, it stopsyou from--it actually doesn't stop you from
thinking about the future--it stops you fromcaring about what you think about the future.
And that's just as good.
And so then you can go out and have fun becausefun is impulsive and often extremely dangerous,
because the long term consequences can bereally devastating.
But it's a real pain to keep yourself controlledall the time because you're foregoing direct
reward constantly.
I think it's part of the reason why peoplein heavily industrialized complex countries
aren't necessarily happy.
You know, it takes a lot of grinding awayto keep all the machinery that keeps all of
this in place going.
So you're not getting typhoid and tigers aren'ttearing you apart, but by the same token,
you have to be unbelievably disciplined andready to act constantly to keep everything
that's so complex around you working.
And that's not necessarily fun.
Okay, now, let’s look at something else.
Now you can tell me if I showed you this--Ihope I didn't show you this.
You see that?
Okay, good.
Now some of you know this, and so you justdon't say anything.
Although you probably don't know this specificversion.
So if you've seen this sort of thing beforeyou're going to think you're smart while you're
watching it, but it'll probably still tripyou up--I hope.
Give me a sec here and we'll see if we canactually get some sound out of this thing.
Yeah, so that's quite the illustration.
So one of the questions you might ask is,well okay first of all, how many of you didn't
see the gorilla?
Okay, how many of you have seen this sortof video before?
Okay so you knew about the damn gorilla [studentlaughter].
Of the people who didn't know about the gorilla,how many people didn't see the gorilla.
Well, some.
Okay, fine.
How many of you got the other things?
Both of them?
Okay, well so you get the point.
The point is--and it's a brilliant experiment,it's an insanely brilliant experiment--that
you're blind to a ridiculous degree.
And your visual system and your brain areconstantly coping with the fact that you're
blind.
And you can kind of detect it to some degreeif you look at someone, but you pay attention
to the things that surround them, you'll seethat--so, I'm looking at you.
I can't see your nose for sure, it's gone.
I can’t even see your face.
I can see your glasses.
I can't see any features in your face at all.
Can you smile?
No, the one behind.
Well one of the things I've noticed when doingthis is that if you look here--look at my
finger--but pay attention to my face, it'sreally hard.
Because normally when you pay attention youmove your eyes to what you're paying attention
to.
Okay so here's what you might see--the firstthing you might see is that you can't see
my nose [student laughter].
The second thing you might see is that youcan really see my eyes, especially if they
move [uproar of student laughter].
Weird eh?
Isn't that weird?
God, it's so weird.
It's like all of a sudden these eyes pop upand they're going back and forth like this.
Yeah, so we'll try this too.
So look at my finger again.
You can also see teeth.
Well, why?
Well, if you're looking here and there's somethingthere with eyes and teeth, you should probably
be able to see it right?
So what that basically means is that you'vegot this tiny little fovea, which is right
in the centre of your retina, it's just denselypacked with cells and then those cells transmit
information along the optic nerve, and they'rejust connected like mad to cells in the visual
cortex.
But you don't have that much room, so youcan't connect all the cells in your retina
to like 10,000 cells at the first level ofconnection.
You'd have to have a brain this big you know,and you don't.
So you get by, and part of the way you getby is you're always moving your eyes around.
And so it looks like you can see everything,but you can't.
In fact, out here, like if I'm looking atyou--now I can tell my hands are there, although
if I didn't know they were hands I probablycouldn't figure it out--they're kinda blurry
I would say.
And they're in black and white, but I can'ttell that.
So out here, who cares what colour it is.
So you just don't see the colour.
But you don't know that you don't see thecolour.
Now of course, I can have my hands here, andthen I put them here--I can hardly see them--and
then oop, they're gone.
They're so gone it's like they don't evenexist.
It's not even--because you'd think in somesense that what is behind your head would
be black, like when you close your eyes, that'snothing.
But no no, what you can't see behind yourhead is so not there that it's literally--it
isn't even not there, that's how gone it is.
Okay, so part of the way your eyes work isthat the periphery is attached to devices,
in some sense, and some of them detect linesand some of them detect movement.
You remember Jurassic Park?
"Don't move.
The dinosaur can't see you unless you move."
It's like, yeah, frogs are like that.
And cats are like that to some degree.
They can really see things move this way.
Partly because their eyes are slitted, makesit easier for them to see things moving like
this.
They're not so good at things moving likethis.
Well, it's because they chase mice, right.
Mice will--most mice, except ones that hop[student laughter]--they move this way, and
so cats are specialized for that.
And so you're also specialized to see teethand eyes because you want to know if something's
looking at you, and you want to know if ithas teeth.
And so what that means in part is that thesurrounding tissue in your eyes reports to
some degree to your visual cortex, which iswhat you use to actually have conscious vision
with, but a lot of it just dumps down intosome of the brain areas we haven't talked
about.
Not necessarily directly down to the hypothalamus,although I suspect it has inputs there, I
just don't know.
But your eyes talk to your spinal cord directly,so that you can see something snake-like,
for example, and jump.
Just like you jump if your hand touches ahot stove.
You don't even see the snake, it's like snake-jump.
And the reason for that is if you wait aroundto see the snake, it's like it's bitten you
15 times and you're dead.
So you can't wait around and see this, like"oh look.
A snake."
And then you jump.
It's like, no.
That doesn't work.
Your body has conserved all these layers ofreflex and movement, all the way up to higher
order voluntary movement, because otherwiseyou just wouldn't be fast enough when something
super fast happens.
And then, the way your eyes are built, youreyes can tell your body to jump.
It's no vision, right.
It's just pattern.
Snake-pattern, jump-pattern.
Snake-pattern, retinal-pattern, optic-nervepattern, brain-pattern, muscle-pattern.
No vision.
No seeing.
Because you don't need the seeing.
You just have to do pattern matching.
It's a weird way of thinking about it, butit's not much different than touching, you
know.
You can feel the pattern, you can build athree-dimensional representation of it, you
can really see well with your eyes--it's likethe idea that blind people can't see is a
really dopey idea.
They can't see colour.
And they're not very good at detecting thingsin the distance.
But they have a visual world, it's just builtout of things that don't have colour.
You know perfectly well that that's the casebecause I can hand you an object and you could
fiddle around with it behind your back andafter some fiddling around you'd know exactly
what it looked like.
And you know you might pull it out here andsay , well I didn't know it was blue.
It's like, yeah okay, you didn't know it wasblue, but you still saw it.
And you get pretty god-damn good vision withyour ears.
So there are kids who're blind who've learnedto echolocate.
So they go click-click-click, they don't makethat noise exactly, but they do click [clicking
sounds] and they can detect the clicks bouncingoff of things.
And they can do that well enough, not onlyto walk, but some of them can actually ride
bikes.
It's like, hey that's impressive, man.
Yeah, there's one kid--I saw a kid on youtubewho's blind who could shoot baskets, yeah,
which is--that's impressive, man.
But my point is that a lot of the neural tissueis--it'll take whatever input it gets.
So if you're born blind, your auditory systemswill invade your visual system.
And then you have twice as much brain devotedto your hearing.
So, and then you know, you can use that quiteeffectively.
So I think we're probably pretty much outof time.
One thing I want to tell you before we goon to the next part though is that--so now
we've sort of built up the idea of these underlyingmotivational systems.
And now you can kind of see how they work,so you might say to yourself, why didn't you
see the gorilla and the curtain and the personleaving.
It's really complicated, it's really complicated.
Well, the first answer is, you did what Iasked.
And then you might ask, well why?
Why did you do what I asked?
I mean you missed the damn gorilla, right.
It's like, obviously that wasn't a very gooddecision.
So you think, well why did you do what I asked?
And the answer would be--well, it's sort oflike the Milgram obedience experiment except
at a way lower level.
It's like, we've got an agreement going onhere.
You guys are all very sophisticated and complexgame players, otherwise you couldn't sit here
peacefully for an hour and a half.
So you're very well socialized, all of you.
And so that means you've organized all yourmotivations into a hierarchy, and that hierarchy
is guiding your behaviour here.
It might be something like, well we need tolearn something and hypothetically, you come
here and you learn something.
And so you're playing that out.
And because that's the motivational statethat you're in, when I ask you to do something,
you're just going to do it.
Well then, what's so cool is that as soonas you decide to point your attention at something,
what you see in the world radically transforms.
So I say, well count the basketballs and allof a sudden all you can see are basketballs.
And you think, no no, I see--I'm not blind.
It's like well, you're pretty damn blind.
And so, that's partly how you can understandhow motivation is a sub-personality.
Like it has its whole sets of perceptionsand values.
It's like, all of a sudden, I set you up ina little motivated state--it was a complicated
one--but it was just like, here's a task.
And so you're all motivated, you're goingto do the task properly, for god only knows
how many reasons, and then all of a sudden,all that exists in the world are basketballs.
And so, it's as if your goal-directed attentionhas transformed the phenomenology of the world.
And that's something that's really cool becauseone of the things it implies is that what
you see of the world depends on what you'reaiming at.
And in a real sense--this isn't some trivialsense.
It means like literally what you're aimingat--I'm going to count the basketballs--it
means, well you're not noticing the gorillas.
So one of the things that you might ask yourself,and this is partly what the phenomenologists
were on about is, what're you aiming at?
And what is it that what you're aiming atallows you to see, and what is it that what
you're aiming at blinds you to.
And it blinds you to a lot more than it allowsyou to see.
And so another thing that you can think aboutis like, if everything you see makes you angry
and bitter and resentful, you might think,well hmm, what exactly am I aiming at that's
making the world organize itself around mein that manner?
And that would be a complex, for a Jungianperspective.
A complex would do that.
So it's a set of values, they're sort of economist,they inhabit you, it's a sub-personality,
it's quite complex, it's got something it'saiming at.
You might not even know what that is becauseyou're acting it out instead of understanding
it.
And because you're inside of it, it lays theworld out for you in a particular way that
makes the world look like it's showing youthat what you think is right.
But if you're--what do they say-- to the manwith a hammer, everything looks like a nail.
And that's one of the things that's so damncool about that experiment.
It's like, really?
I'm really that blind?
I can miss something that radical just whenI'm involved in some dopey task like counting
basketballs it makes me so blind that it'salmost beyond comprehension.
Well, so in some ways you skip between differentstates of blindness.
A lot of them are biologically motivated.
And you turn those into a hierarchy and that'ssort of your higher value system and then
that thing points you at something, and thewhole world lays itself out around that.
And the way it does it is divides the worldinto irrelevant things--and so those would've
been the curtains in this particular example,or the gorilla or even the player in black
who left the game--irrelevant, because itdidn't interfere with you counting.
So what you look at makes most of the worldirrelevant.
It makes some things , things that serve you.
And that makes you feel positive emotion.
And it makes other things things that getin your way.
And that's what makes negative emotions.
And so you've got the hypothalamic systemsthat point you in biological directions.
You organize those, and then, as you're approachingthe things you're aiming at, the positive
emotion systems tell you you're on track andthe negative emotion systems tell you when
something's interfering.
And those are actually different neurologicalsystems.
So they're not in the hypothalamus.
The positive emotion system is in some degree.
But the negative emotion system, that evolvedlater.
And there's a couple of them.
There's one that produces pain, we'll talkabout it more.
And there's another one that produces anxiety.
And so, now you kind of understand--roughly--therelationship between motivation, perception,
and emotion.
They all act together.
And they're all dependent in this weird wayon what you're after.
So you can think for 50 years and you won'tget to the bottom of it.
You know the Buddhists say that everythingis illusion.
Maya, right, people live in illusion.
Because what you're aiming at determines whatyou see.
So, anyways, it's worth thinking about.