Gwilda 0:28  
The science of magic with Gwilda Wiyaka is largely an opinion talk show. All opinions, comments or statements of fact expressed by Gwilda. We act as guests are strictly their own and are not to be construed as those of the science of magic or endorsed in any manner by willowby Akka Romar McConnell media company its affiliated networks stations or employees.
Welcome to the science of magic with Gwilda Wiyaka, a program dedicated to uncovering the unified nature of reality and humanities ever evolving places truly galactic beings. For more information on the science of magic with Gwilda Wiyaka, visit us online at www dot the science of magic.net.
Hi there and welcome once again to the science of magic. Gwilda Wiyaka here, bringing you more dynamic guests and topics to help us enter a deeper understanding of life and our place in it. This hour will pursue our interconnectedness as we consider continuity. We've been living in an age supporting separation polarization and tunnel vision. Be it right or wrong, true or false, logical or emotional, scientific or magical. Everything has been viewed as mutually expect elusive. Many sources indicate We're now entering a time that supports unity and multidimensionality. A time of continuity, whereby polarized approaches are becoming increasingly dysfunctional. We're being challenged to find where things meet and agree in order to embrace a larger truth, for wisdom to evolve. How can this be achieved? There's one element that binds all things together, love, yet we understand so little of love. Love is not an emotion, that we have an emotional response to it. To the quantum physicist love is scalar energy. The Mystic, the very breath of God, to the philosopher is the essence that fills a space between all things. Unity and continuity is complex, and can only be understood from a multi dimensional multi discipline viewpoint, one which embraces both science and magic. Our guest this hour appears to be well qualified to help us delve into this concept. With this is Forrest Landry. philosopher, writer, researcher, scientist, software developer, engineer and craftsman. He's the founder and CEO of magic Flight, a b2c wood products design and manufacturing company, skilled in large scale software systems design applications and architecture. He's completed production work in several federal projects, including supporting FBI investigative capacities and the Library of Congress congressional records system. He's also the author of several books and essays on foundational ethics ontology, and the philosophy is by his website, magic dash blight.com. For us, thank you so much for joining us on the science of magic. Thank you. 

Forrest 3:41  
You're welcome.

Gwilda 3:44  
Do you think we're in the middle of a shift in reality?

Forrest 3:47  
I think reality is shifting all the time and for quite a ride, fun to enjoy and to be a life. It seems to be accelerating during these days of what's causing this shift. Well, I don't necessarily know that I could speak to causality at the level of what's happening in politics or in the world today, other than to say that, you know, the things that we all know, major changes in the climate, major changes in the economy, new ideas being brought forward, new technologies being brought forward, all of these things influencing people and civilization in multiple ways. But as, as I was saying, before, we live in interesting times, and we should, of course, learn as best as we can, how to how to basically be in that context.

Gwilda 4:36
So here's an interesting one, what is wisdom? 

Forrest 4:40
Wisdom, I think is a capacity to integrate, you know, our experiences in our life and to be able to respond in a holistic way to the situations that we find ourselves in. So you know, there's a there's a kind of maturity elements which has to do with how we respond to situations our level of responsibility and Then, really we want to take that to sort of a level of, of inclusiveness. So in other words, not just responding to our own needs or being responsible just for ourselves, but also being responsible to the environment, looking at the larger context of choices that people are making and trying to essentially, I guess you could say that there's an element of enablement. In the process of wisdom, it's sort of responding from a deeper perspective.

Gwilda 5:26  
My shamanic teacher taught me to always try to consider the best that serves all concerned. And that's all of our relations, including plants and animals. Is this kind of part of what you're talking about?

Forrest 5:37  
Yeah, absolutely. I think that the Native American thing of thinking about the next seven generations is is absolutely vital to having a really good solid perspective. When we're making choices. If we're just thinking about the short term. We're not going to make as good choices as if we sort of think about the larger context what's truly win win for all people involved at at all levels of being Um, so in other words, it's not that we have to, you know, make a choice. It's either-or. We basically want to make choices that are both-and.

Gwilda 6:08  
Yeah. We're gonna have to take a short break for us today, will return shortly, so don't go away. You're listening to the science of magic. Our current episodes are aired daily on the exone broadcast network. Exit bn.net prior innovative episodes can be accessed free of charge on our website, the science of magic net. The science of magic is produced by realm McConnell media company, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
The scientists and the mystic have been on an age old relentless search with one thing in common, they seek truth. Their paths converge in the 40,000 year old practice of shamanism and ancient science delving to the quantum level of life, facilitating healing manifestation and evolution. I'm Golda we eka, the founder and director of path home she monic Arts School, a unique colorado state certified occupational school training, shamanic practitioners and teachers. We also provide classes for empowering personal lives through shamanism. Our certification classes are in week long segments enabling international participation and online classes and long distance shamanic Healing Sessions are available come discover the science of magic in the limitless world of shamanism www dot find your path home calm.
Welcome back, folks, this is the science of magic dedicated to unification and evolution of consciousness. I'm your host willowy eka, our guest this hour is Forrest Landry, author, philosopher, researchers, scientists, software, developer, engineer and Craftsman his website magic dash light.com. For us, we were talking about the importance of considering the the seventh generation of considering all concerned in our decision making coming from wisdom. And it seems like we've been living in a very short sighted period, haven't we?

Forrest 8:39  
I would think so. Yeah, there's a there's a tendency for people to think in terms of optimizing. So they want to, you know, optimize the number of people that are clicking on their website, or they want to optimize the number of sales or the number of voters and things like that. Whereas really, we live in a world that that is more about the kinds of relationships that we have. We constantly ask each other what's in Important, what is the most meaningful thing? And that that sort of focus about looking at the deeper meanings, looking at the deeper connections and the relationships and the kind of values that we fulfill with each other is is something that, you know, we need to practice and get better at, because that's a lot of what makes life a lot more enjoyable. It also makes it a lot healthier. Because when we think about the future, and we think about the possibilities, we can, in a sense, look at reality in a more inclusive way.

Gwilda 9:30  
It seems like we've been, you know, again, short sighted, but also we're not seeing the whole very well. Why do you suppose that is?

Forrest 9:41  
Well, I think that, as you mentioned earlier, it's a question of wisdom, the question of maturity when people first come into this world, they're still learning how to live their own lives and how to have essentially their their situation worked out. But as we get older, we start thinking in terms of other people in terms of our immediate lovers and then you know, maybe with time with Within terms of a family, and then as you grow older, a larger family, really, we're looking at kind of an accelerated process that allows us to think in terms of broader and broader context. So you go from the family, to the community, and then from the community to, to essentially the, the environment until you know, larger issues, what we're really looking to do is, is to have that happen sooner and more fully, because the kinds of issues that are facing humanity today, environmental problems and things like that, really require a much higher level of responsiveness on our part in order to be able to adequately address so while people may have, you know, they get maturity as they develop through life and stuff like that, assuming things go well, you know, we're needing to have more emphasis on that. I think a lot of the advertising and a lot of the marketplace and stuff like that cell phones and Twitter and things like that all encourage very short responses, very, very immediate responses and our attention hasn't really been drawn into the larger context as fully.

Gwilda 11:04  
You know, we seem to be moving from a polarized view where the thing is, either is or it isn't. Is wisdom evolving as a result?

Forrest 11:13  
I think so, I mean, you know, part of wisdom is a perspective, you know, when we, when we have a larger perspective, when we look at things from a more holistic perspective, we see possibilities that otherwise might not have been available. And that's a big, big piece of it that are part of the benefit of having a larger perspective is seeing those options, those hidden paths. If you're presented with with two choices, you might remember that actually you haven't even been bigger choice or larger choice. Someone may ask you Well, do you want to buy the red car, the blue one and it's our task to remember, well, maybe Now's not the time to buy a car, maybe I want to buy a bicycle or maybe I basically want to fly on an airplane and travel that way. And so it's incumbent upon us to remember the larger context of the choices that we Have not to let ourselves get boxed in with the options that are being presented to us.

Gwilda 12:05  
How about creating options? Do we have the option? Do we have the option right now to start creating new options?

Forrest 12:12  
I do think so. Yes. In fact, I think that's when we talk about the fundamental structure of reality. One of the things that I've basically been working with is the is not only can we create options, but that it's necessary unethical for us to do so. In a lot of ways, there's these, there's these really low level ideas that basically say, when when presented with a choice, that it's always possible to choose in a win win manner, and that the way that we make that happen, or the way that we can bring that about, is by creating new options. You know, we can create intellectual models that sort of help us in and things like that. But really the the effort here is to think of it in sort of a kind of design modality. How do I design a good choice? How do I design a choice that opens up future possibilities and future choices so When we're making a choice, we're wanting to look at you know, actualizing in the present, you know, the best possible outcome win win for all people involved. But we also want that choice to lead to future choices lead to future opportunities, which are also enabling for for all of the participants. And that that's that's a practice I mean, it's it's an ongoing effort. It's an ongoing consciousness but but it really carries a lot of rewards because you begin to see options you begin to see possibilities and to to manifest them and it's a very magical thing to do that.

Gwilda 13:29  
Don't you think that it's a process of also rewiring the brain because we have these neurological pathways burnt based on our agreed upon reality, which is polarized doggy dog. So aren't we actually having to rewire the way our brain works?

Forrest 13:44  
Well, in the same way that we would be redeveloping habits so yes, in the same way that our our neurology is an abbreviation of our perceptions. So in other words, we're not overwhelmed by our experiences, you know, habits are an abbreviation of our choices. So that we in a sense can focus on the things that matter. It's not that all habits are bad or that all neurology is bad. Obviously, there's some things about ourselves that are, that are very well adapted to the world. But for the parts of us that don't fit or the things that aren't working, we need to be able to step back, look at the habits, make them into things that are choices, and then choose differently. And that takes effort. I mean, it's not, it's not overnight that a person changes a habit. You know, when we, when we're reworking our neurology and stuff like that, it's, it's usually a consistent effort of about 40 days for the new habit to take effect.

Gwilda 14:32  
Yeah, I call them seven, I call them sub routines. So like, you have to dismantle one separate team, you have to first become conscious of them, right? And then dismantle the ones that are no longer serving and choose which ones to build. So you still have a structure to come from.

Forrest 14:46  
Exactly. And that whole processes is very worthwhile. I mean, first of all, it gives us the option of replacing non working separate teams with working ones. And when we do that, we want to think about the kinds of things that the old sub routine was Functional four. I mean, sometimes we don't, we don't want to throw the baby out with the bathwater, we want to say, Okay, well, what were the needs that this was serving? And how can we meet those needs, and also all these other needs, at the same time and in a better way. So, you know, it's not that we're trying to, you know, wholesale, just reject beliefs or habits or or you know, neurological patterns. We're basically trying to be conscious of how do we do good design? How do we create a method of interaction? That is that is not only healthy for us, but healthy for the environment, and there's no reason why we can't get both of both of those objectives. At the same time.

Gwilda 15:38  
Of course, what is ontology?

Forrest 15:41  
It's actually ontology. And ontology, yeah, it's the study of the nature of being. So in other words, when metaphysics in sort of the researcher academic ways, is classically thought of as asking two really big questions. What is real How do we know? The "what is real" question is what we mean by ontology. And the How do we know is, is is known by the term of epistemology. And between those two topics, we're really considering the essence of what metaphysics is about, at least as far as a research philosopher would think about it. I tend to sort of expand on that notion a little bit to say that the real essence of the inquiry is the relationship between the self and the reality that one lives in or, or between the subjective and the objective. And that really what we're looking at is an inquiry into the fundamental nature, the basic pattern that is that is intrinsic to the relationship between self and reality, subjective and objective, and that by understanding that we can understand things like the scientific method, we can understand about choice about causality and a whole host of other things.

Gwilda 16:54  
So seems like the question itself, that ontology brings up is that process Is that you were talking about as reexamining reevaluating reconsidering in order to let reality evolve. Is that true?

Forrest 17:08  
Yes, well there's there's sort of a co evolution between self and reality. I mean, if, if reality is changing self needs to evolve in order to stay in balance with reality and if itself is changing, to some extent, you want to have your environmental circumstances continue to be, you know, in balance with you. And and it really there's a, there's a kind of reciprocal study between those two those two aspects of it. But the real essence of what is interesting about that relationship is the relationship itself. In the same way that when we're working on a relationship with another person, and a lot of it has to do with the communication, how good is the communication to people understand one another as they're related in this going on? And, you know, through that process of, of thinking about the, you know, the dynamic of the communication between self and reality we can, we can begin to make that communication cleaner, clearer, more fulfilling, more healthy. More sounds and intellect, ecological context. And that that clarity is is is actually really enabling it helps us to, to see options make better choices and to essentially create conscious sustainable evolution which is something to strive for in a large way.

Gwilda 18:17  
So you talking about the relationship between ourself in our, in our personal reality and also the relationship between ourselves and everything else out there.

Forrest 18:27  
Yes, so in effect, you know, you could think of it as, okay, everything outside of the surface of my skin I can think of as the world and everything inside I can think of myself but the, the position at which we, we put the, the relationship between self and reality is actually something of a variable. I mean, we can, we can move the notion of self and have it be more inclusive or less inclusive, depending upon what makes sense for the kind of context that we're thinking and of the choices that we're making. Some of this gets kind of abstract pretty quickly, but the main thing that we're really looking is, you know, if I want to change a habit, I have to first identify it as a habit in order to make it something that I can be conscious of choosing. Whereas if I'm, if the habit is something that I'm perceiving through, then it then it doesn't really look like anything I could choose, it's sort of the context of choice. A good example maybe to think about, sort of clarify this is that for many people who have, who have a driver's license, you know, when they first learned how to drive a car, their, their experiences of the steering wheel of the pedals of, of, you know, essentially the immediate automobile itself. But as we get more adapted to, to that, that experience in that that environment, eventually we, we don't drive with the vehicle we drive through the vehicle. In other words, the car becomes an expression of our, of our relationship to the road or to other drivers or to, to essentially, you know, some goal I want to get from here to there. And so we're not really thinking of the car as something we interact with, but something we interact through that transition from, you know, being in relationship with to being in relationship through is in a sense treating the automobile as an extension of ourselves. And that would be a case in which the boundary of self has actually moved.

Gwilda 20:13  
That sounds like a pretty healthy movement.

Forrest 20:16  
It does. And so, you know, to some extent, if we were having bad driving habits, we'd have to, in a sense, reverse that flow. We have to, in a sense, remember that, Oh, this is something that I'm relating with and therefore be able to change my relationship with. So you know, in a lot of ways, we want to move the context around, we want to, in a sense, see from multiple perspectives. You mentioned multidimensionality before so where does dimensionality come from? Well, we have two eyes, right when I'm talking to physical you know, eyeball Oregon, right. And, when we see from both of those perspectives that we combine this to each two dimensional image to create an A sense of depth, a sense of, of parallax, or essentially be Being able to tell how far away something is. And in the same way, when we are when we're talking about perspective, from one person communicating with another person, if I can see from someone else's point of view, and integrate that with my own perceptions, then I perceive reality in a deeper way with more dimensions. So in a lot of ways, it's actually quite interesting to have conversations with people where you can gain.

Gwilda 21:23  
I'm going to have to pick up on the other side with this subject. And I do want to do that, as it's great, Forrest. I will return to our discussion on the other side of this break. So don't you go away? We're coming to you through the exone broadcast network. Don't miss the other fine shows and hosts on exit bn.net you're listening to the science of magic, the science of magic net.
Hi, I'm glad. Did you know that shamanism has been around for 50,000 years in practice by all indigenous cultures. These ancients understood there's more to healing and health than just the physical. All four levels physical, emotional, mental and spiritual must be addressed in order for us to enjoy healthy, abundant lives. To find quality, shamanic healing you can trust you need look no further than path home long distance, shamanic healing program. All path home practitioners have been trained and certified through path home shamanic art school, a Colorado State occupational school and are handpicked personally trained by me to uphold the excellence of path homes long distance program, live abundantly, Schedule A shamanic session with me or one of my quality practitioners today, call 303-775-3431 or visit find your path home.com
Welcome back. This is the science of magic, a place where magic and science come together to promote enlightenment. I'm your host, Golda we eka. This hour. Our guest is author Forrest Landry, his website, magic dash flight.com. For us, we were talking about how you get binocular vision, if you will you get depth perception because you have two eyes. There's a concept called triangulation, where you look at things from three different viewpoints, when and how does that fit in here?

Forrest 23:37  
Well, it does. I mean, it's basically the combining of multiple viewpoints creates an increasing depth. So the more viewpoints that we can bring together on more than just to the greater level of dimensionality and depth that is available. Every single pairing between you know two different viewpoints contributes another dimension. And so if I have three viewpoints, then I have essentially Three new dimensions because there's three pairs. If I add four viewpoints, then I get even more possible pairings and so the level of dimensionality increases geometrically in proportion to the number of combined viewpoints. And really there there's there is a kind of sensitivity. I mean, we want to have those viewpoints well combined, in other words, is that there's a sense of, of allowing another person's point of view to be truly authentically theirs. And really being honest and understanding your own viewpoint, having a good sense of knowledge of self. And then being able to, to to synthesize or to bring together those those those multiple viewpoints in a way that creates coherence, it creates a kind of perspective that is inclusive of those.

Gwilda 24:46  
And isn't that a very powerful technique? Isn't that what's your isn't that what you're doing by combining all these different things that you're in, you know, from from philosophy to to ontology isn't that part of what you're doing?

Forrest 25:01  
Well yes, I enjoy many different aspects of life and being able to think about things from a craftsman point of view from a sort of information science point of view from, from a very theoretical point of view in terms of mathematics or physics, you know, from a philosophical point of view from a kind of human nature and emotional point of view, you know, all of these are very, very different ways of looking at each situation. And by basically having facility with each of these languages, each of these modes of relationship, we, in a sense gain a, we gain a level of facility in the sense that we can say, Okay, well, this problem might not be easy to solve in this language. But I know how to translate it into this other language where it really is easy to work with. And I solve it there and then I can translate the answer back into the first language that I was working in, and this technique is, is it's a known technique. I mean, I didn't invent that but people have been doing things like that for a long time. So By having a lot of languages, you basically have a toolkit that allows you to interact with great facility with new situations and with, with, you know, new questions that come up, that gives you a lot of creative capacities.

Gwilda 26:15  
So when we're bringing all these different viewpoints together, what's the value of bringing all the practices together at this particular time?

Forrest 26:24  
Well, especially for the situation that we're in, in the world today, I mean, there's a lot of problems that, you know, humanity is facing, and they're not going to be solved. using the tools and technology that created the problems in the first place, we're in effect going to have to design new solutions, come up with new ways of thinking about it. And, and so in effect the practices is, is one that is, you know, really needing to be sustaining a nurturing of life. You know, anything that doesn't sustain or nurture life is not going to continue to live. So, you know, just from a very practical, very pragmatic point of view. It's really incumbent upon us To, to recognize that in our, you know, technology and in our capacities that we have, we have, in effect become like gods in this world, we, we have a level of responsibility with all of these technologies and powers that we have, in a sense, you know, encumbered ourselves with. And so in effect, we, we need to be more responsible, we need to be more conscious of the impact of what we're doing, we need to think longer about, you know, the kinds of choices we're making and the kind of impacts they're going to have. And think of, what kinds of choices can we make today that will facilitate a more graceful future? You know, my partner basically says, Be kind to your future self. And, you know, in the sense in the, in the larger context, not only do we need to do that individually, but we as a planet as a species need to be kind to our future self.

Gwilda 27:51  
Absolutely, we did. What is research metaphysics?

Forrest 27:56  
So basically, the whole idea is, as I mentioned earlier, is essentially an inquiry into the relationship between self and reality. So on one level, we're looking at it from a theoretical point of view. But on another level, we're looking at it a very practical point of view. So we're trying to understand what are the essential nature of the relationship between self and reality and things we find out like, for example, in the English language, we tend to take the word existence to be real, and to be objective as if they were synonymous. But as we investigate, we discover that these terms are actually used in different ways. And that there's, there's really a distinction between them and the notion of to be real is actually in a certain sense more primal than the notion of to exist to be objective. And you say, Well, okay, that's maybe a technical thing. But what it does is it allows that that clarity allows us to ask different questions. So in effect, we moved to the level of thinking about choice change and causality as the foundation of the real and then we can start thinking about things like well, what is the relationship between choice and determinism as it comes up and you know, sort of philosophical foundations of science thinking. And, you know, if we investigate that we can say, well, we noticed that there is a difference between the notion of causality and the notion of determinism. And that the world that we live in is actually a causal universe rather than a deterministic one. So even though our scientific methods are models and mathematics is essentially presenting a model, which is, which is essentially structured and, and allows us to predict the future and so on so forth, that there's an element of our experiences and elements of our interaction with reality that is not predictable that is not knowable in advance. And so, you know, we've explored that with quantum mechanics. And we've explored that with, you know, essentially, sort of the kind of nonlinear, you know, chaotic kind of phenomenon, such as weather and things like that. And so we're beginning to understand a little bit more about our relationship with reality in terms of time and the and the fundamental ideas to compose the very foundations of science, that whole area of investigation is what we mean by research metaphysics.

Gwilda 30:05  
Okay, could you speak to the relationship between physics, metaphysics and philosophy?

Forrest 30:11  
So physics is essentially, there's three different kinds of questions. So physics is an answer to a why type question. So we asked, Well, you know, why does this happen? or Why does that happen? So, you know, we come up with models. So physics is essentially, you know, an answer to a why question. metaphysics is actually asking a deeper, different question. And it's somewhat deeper one, its main question is What? So metaphysics isn't really about trying to answer why something happens, it's just trying to describe the nature of what these concepts are. So for example, when we say okay, something is real, or what do we mean by the notion of choice? Or what do we mean by the notional causality? It's not just a semantic exercise, it's more about the relationship between the concepts. So in a sense, what we're trying to do is we're trying to find out what are the deepest concepts that essentially underlie Why things like the scientific method? Or the notions of time and space and probability? And how do we understand the relationships between those concepts? And what those relationships actually consist of? how clear can we can we make our understanding of those relationships? philosophy, in contrast to metaphysics is essentially asking, actually somewhat broader questions. So, you know, traditionally, philosophy would be just the study or the love of kind of the knowledge of you know, how to live a good life and things like that. And it's usually regarded as consisting of topics like ethics, aesthetics, and ethics being, you know, what is a choice? That's a good choice? And statics would be what is a choice? That's a beautiful choice. So, you know, if we take a look at metaphysics, we're looking at you know, what is reality and how do we know anything about reality, how we know anything at all. Whereas when we go to philosophy, we're looking at a more practical human relationship. A perspective of how do I personally live a good life? What is the what is the nature by which I experience the world? And how do I integrate myself into it? And how do I integrate my experiences into myself? That gets more into the notions of spirituality?

Gwilda 32:14  
Got it? So how do you view magic? And how would you define it?

Forrest 32:19  
So in a lot of ways, as an engineer, there's there's kind of this interesting reciprocal study between magic and engineering. As an engineer, I'm trying to essentially constrain the possibilities to be just the thing I want to have happen. So I went on writing software, I'm trying to prevent bad things from happening and make it so that only the good thing can happen. Whereas in a sort of magical way of thinking, what I'm trying to do is I'm trying to create more possibilities, I'm trying to make it more likely that the good thing will happen by creating more, more good things to choose from and having essentially opening up the door of more potential reality. So in one case, it's sort of like I'm trying to, to, to to to narrow focus and wonder direction and another case I'm trying to broaden focus and make it more attractive in that particular direction.

Gwilda 33:05  
Aren't you always go? I'm sorry. Go ahead. Go ahead. I was I was going to ask, Are you all also working with so if you're working with the engineering, you're working with the physical aspect. And when you're working with the magic, you're working before it becomes physical, like in the quantum level?

Forrest 33:21  
Well, in the sense, potential reality is, is not a physical thing. I mean, you know, we, we have actuality, you know, we have essentially the CN touch world that is essentially our immediate experience, but the potentials of the future, what could happen, what sort of things are, are possible, we are infected and engaged in an exercise of design, we're looking at opening up more possibilities. And I'm not just thinking about that in a technological way. I'm thinking about that also in emotional ways. You say, as you as you have greater wisdom and you perceive more possibilities. You have more dimensions and levels of engagement, more languages that you speak in terms of You know, the skills and practices, you begin to see how to open up the door to more things to become possible. And, and to encourage those things to sort of nurture them. Magic is not a, it's not something that we can compel. It's only something that we can encourage. And so in a lot of ways, you know, it's sort of like, you know, trying to create growth or try to create healing. You can't purchase those things at a drug store, you have to, in a sense, nurture them into being by creating good nurturing circumstances.

Gwilda 34:28  
How much does our belief systems and our intent play into delving into magic?

Forrest 34:34  
I think it plays a lot of role. I mean, you know, when I when I think about the practice, I'm thinking about intent as essentially being the very first and most essential step. Well, actually, there's lots of essential steps but the first the first aspect is to have clarity of intention. You want to be really specific about what it feels like to to have a certain experience I mean, you know, if we're, if we're looking about, you know, relationships for example, Need to innocence have the clarity about the qualities of the person I want to come into relationship with rather than say things like, how tall they are, and how how much they might weigh or what their eye color might be, or, or you know, those those kinds of attributes would actually be very limiting. Whereas if you're talking about qualities of experience, and you become really, really clear about that, then in effect, what you've done is you've allowed the form of how that, that that experience may come into your life, to to essentially be open. It's sort of like you make a deal with the universe, you say, Okay, I'm going to pick how it feels. And you can pick how it shows up. And there you are, about how it feels, the simpler it's going to be for it to show up.

Gwilda 35:44  
So it's an act of envisioning what you want or designing it in the imagination. And I've heard that if you can't imagine it, you can't create it.

Forrest 35:52  
That's true. And the thing is, is that in effect, what we're looking at is to have a have a clear feeling. So we're trying to imagine the experience that We receive it. And part of that, as you were saying, if you can't imagine it, it's that you can't see yourself receiving it. And so as a result, the effort becomes how do I become the vehicle that can receive this experience? How do I transform myself so that I can, I can, in a sense, recognize when the opportunity has arisen when the wind is.

Gwilda 36:22  
We're gonna have to take another little timeout for us and I will be back shortly so don't leave us now. This is the science of magic, your resource to altruistic professionals of science and the esoteric, working to create common ground for the betterment of our world. Join our email family to receive our topic driven episode collections at the science of magic.net
Will do we act his latest book the science of magic book of mysteries Volume One is the first book in a series based on her writings that open every episode of the science of magic radio show, drawing on the subject matter of each guest and armed with over 40 years experience in shamanism. 35 years in alternative health and degrees in psychology and religious studies will they introduce as relevant and leading edge information that supports spiritual evolution and personal empowerment? rich with wisdom and inspirational quotes packaged in digestible segments. This is a book that will pull you from cover to cover. It will also serve as a daily inspirational reading for years to come. The science of magic book of mysteries Volume One is available at our website TSL when publications.com amazon.com and wherever fine books are sold.
Welcome back. This is the science of magic, bringing together gifted people of service to the world. I'm your host Gwilda Wiyaka. What's up in your world? Email me at info at the science of magic.net. And suggest a topic that's on your mind. You're probably not the only one interested. Again, our guest this hour is Forrest Landry, his website, magic dash light.com. For us, we've been, you know, pondering very heady things for the first part of this program. Let's go into love, what can you tell me about love.

Forrest 38:43  
So, basically, love is that which enables choice. And this is a very, very, very, very specific practice. When we say we love another person, the highest meaning of that is to essentially say I'm choosing in a way that enables your choices, I don't want to choose on behalf of you, I don't want to limit your choices, I want you to become the most complete, most alive, most creative and vibrant and fulfilled version of yourself as possible. And in doing that, I get to know who you are, I get to know more of the, of the creature that you are and that you can become. So when we, when we say that we love another person, we're really talking about a very deep knowledge of, of, you know, ourselves and of them and basically wanting to enable them to become more alive. So the notion of enabling choices is very, very fundamental to this idea. And there's a lot of different ramifications to that. So for example, when we're talking about how a parent might Love A Child, we're looking at a situation where the parent knows that someday that child is going to become an adult and the best way that we can serve them the best way that we can enable them to have Have a healthy and fulfilled life is to is to encourage wisdom in them to encourage them to be aware of the choices and to make good choices. And we can't do that by making the choices for them, we can only do that by essentially nurturing their capacity to choose. And obviously, this is a very gradual thing, you don't want to put too many choices in front of a person too quickly. But you want to basically do it in a way that that is integrated with their, with their current situation with their current level of health and awareness. And really, when we're talking about enabling choice, we're really implementing the practice of love. And so this is, this is a different way of thinking about it's not necessarily grounded in just how one feels or the emotions that one has, or, or some sort of, you know, particularly poetic way of looking at it, but it's a very, very clear way of thinking about it. When I'm wondering whether or not someone's loving me I can think about, you know, are they are they trying to limit who I am, are they trying to enable who I am and a If I, if I get the sense that it's an enabling thing that I'm going to have the experience, I'm gonna have the feeling of being loved. And the way that I create that and other people, like I said, it's essentially to create choice to create options to create things which are, which are nurturing to them, and to their well being. And this, this skills to all sorts of levels, for instance, when we could think about, you know, the relationship between, say, a governments and the people, what is the function of government? What is it for, well, ultimately, fundamentally, what it's really about, and you know, protecting the land and the people, and that if we have a really enlightened government, we're looking at something that is not just protecting them, it's actually helping them to thrive, it's helping, you know, people to live fulfilled lives, and so helping to create, you know, a side of sort of ecology that is that is preserving for future generations and so that they can have full fulfilled lives. You know, there's this notion of love is that which enables choices, is is truly a key touchstone as to what is the central idea of what we mean by that term.

Gwilda 41:59  
So if we get down more into the energetics of it is loving emotion, or do we have an emotional response to its frequency?

Forrest 42:06  
I think of love as an emotion. So I've described it as a practice up, you know, saying that energetically, it is an emotion, it's essentially a flow of energy. So when a lot of ways we can think of it as kind of like this, this cloud of energy that is permeating all things and that when we're, when we're basically trying to show love to another person, what we do is we tap into this, this field of potential realities, and we take some of the potentials that we experienced some of the energies that we experienced there. And we, we focus it in the direction of another person we bring it to, to a kind of clarity to, to essentially enable another person but it starts off as an emotional experience. Well, at least I'm saying that there's a, there's a there's an energetic element to it. I mean, anytime that we're expressing an energy anytime that we're making a choice, we're in a sense, you know, moving energy from the inside from the subjective into the outside world.

Gwilda 43:03  
When we're letting love move through us into the world, loving others loving our environment. How What effect does that have on the world at large?

Forrest 43:14  
Well, the first thing I wanted to say is is to to allow love to move through oneself, clarity is essential, right? So the more that we can create clarity in ourselves, the more clean and, and pure and supportive our love actually is when that that clarity manifests in the world and manifests as a kind of kind of a light in the manifest as a kind of enablement. And so as a sense, what happens is that the, the increased potential realities in the world lead to an actuality that is more more fulfilling, because obviously, that's the whole point. I mean, if we, if we weren't loving very well, the world itself would, would not improve, it wouldn't necessarily become a better place. You know, it's kind of cliche as a as a, you know, manufacturer As a business owner to say, Hey, you know, I want to change the world was really what we're looking at is helping other people we're looking at creating essentially, lives that are, that are easier, more fulfilled, more alive. And and of course that is making the world a better place. So, you know, there's, there's, it's not, it's not difficult to hypothesize that, you know, by thinking about sustaining conscious, you know, conscious, sustainable evolution we're looking at, you know, essentially helping the world to be healthier.

Gwilda 44:35  
Would you speak to the importance of the unity of heart and mind, particularly this time.

Forrest 44:40  
But when we, when we act as a whole self, the effectiveness that we have the level of influence, the level of impact that we have in the world is greatly increased. So, for instance, if we, if we're acting as a whole being heart, mind and body if we're, if we're in a sense, all aligned, moving in the same direction, that That that becomes a very powerful force and very organized. You know, the more coherent I am, the more the more that all of the aspects of my being are in alignment. The more that that coherency leads to potential reality leads to a kind of magical capacity to create more options. When the self is divided, when the hearts moving in one direction and the minds moving in another and the Council of being is essentially divided. One's effectiveness in the world is greatly diminished. It's, it's not in proportion, it's like a, it's like a logarithmic or an exponential effect. You know, if I'm, if I'm divided in half, and you know, conflicted, in my own sense, my effectiveness in the world is, is much less than half the influence. Whereas if I'm unified as a being or better, if I'm in coherency, with other people, and we're all together moving as a group, and then the level of change that can be created a level of potential reality that's availables, enormous, much, much greater than the sum of the parts.

Gwilda 45:58  
So you see love as unifying as the essence that unifies all things, it allows us to come together in a coherent way that allows us to, in a sense, be not only able to cooperate but to have the maturity and the vision to see what sort of changes what sort of things we want to encourage what sort of things that are actually right, a win win choice to make in the world. And you know, that's really easy to get behind. I mean, you know, if we're talking about unconditional love, we have to, in a sense, enable unconditional acceptance and that's a that's a reciprocal process in ourselves as well as some other people. Obviously, if we create that kind of outcome you know, there's no question that people are going to be happy here I you know, on a philosophical level all of this is very simple. When we're getting down to the actual practices of it of course, you know, the real essence of it like I said, is is creating clarity How do I become clear? And the more clear I am the more that I can let the light the light through i can i can innocence, let the openness happen.
Yeah, I have a saying that when the light is suddenly as clear as the window through which it shines, it's all about clarity, isn't it? So what's next for you, Forrest? What do you believe your service is to the world?

Forrest 47:10  
Well, as As you've probably noticed, I basically am trying to enable the world to be a better place. And my particular idea of that is to have you know, my focus, I guess the specific thing that I'm that I'm particularly about is the relationship between man and nature in terms of how we create health in the trees, particularly My name is Forrest. So I have a particular reverence for trees, I particularly reverence for the forest. So a lot of what I'm interested in is, in a sense, creating healthier ecosystems. And that's that's been sort of the focus of why I've developed all this philosophy, Why think about these issues, and how I bring you know, business practices together and all that.

Gwilda 47:54  
So as the head just opened up, when you said that life works, in a particular way, and it sounds to me like you're hooking into it on all levels, including in computers and in trees?

Forrest 48:06  
Yes, that's, that's absolutely correct. I see a great unity between a very analog way of relating to the world in a very digital way of relating to the world, I have great depth of experience. And in both realms, the analog and the digital and for me, the interesting questions are the are the relationships between the two, you know, looking at the organic, working with wood, and so on and so forth. And at the same time, understanding how, you know, people interact and how the ecosystem is essentially created around a product and at the same time, you know, understanding things like computer science and, and looking at mathematics and technology and the kinds of ways in which those interact with humanity and nature as well. Fascinating series of questions in that space. I spend a lot of time thinking about the relationship between the organic and the inorganic, and it goes back to multidimensionality doesn't it?

Gwilda 49:00  
Forrest, I can't thank you enough for the beautiful service you're doing to the world and you keep your hands on that wood it seems to be giving you some good lessons there. Bless the trees.

Forrest 49:12  
Bye Bye now.

Gwilda 49:13  
Our guest this hour has been Forrest Landry and author philosopher, researcher, scientist, software developer engineer and Craftsman his website magic dash flight.com This has been the science of magic. Until next time, dear ones, may we find all you desire, one in need as you live in the center of unconditional love, coming from the shop.
