So now let's talk about virtual reality.
We have this idea that one of the things thatour media does, one of the things the way
that we perceive the world does, is changethe nature of how our psychology works.
Our psychology is designed to be adaptiveto our environment, and so if I change the
way that we're interacting with the environmentI change the psychology, and that has durable
effects.
VR is kind of a big deal.
It represents a radical increase in our capacityto modify the way that we perceive reality.
It's highly immersive, it's multi-modal, soin principle it can be visual, auditory, kinesthetic—I
mean we could layer other things potentiallyin, with electrical stimulation and olfactory
if we want to—but the idea is that our conscioussense of self-identity, our position in the
world, is actually a relatively loosely heldconstruct.
There's been very good experiments on theway that you can actually cause someone’s
sense of even where their body is in spaceto just go away and make them feel like they're
15 feet in front of where they actually are,because we're always doing our best job to
integrate the total input of our sensory modalitiesto make a coherent gestalt of, 'Oh this is
world, and this is self.'
And what VR does is it provides enough fidelityof information and enough coherence of modality
to jack or hack that underlying mechanismwhereby we actually create our construct of
self and world.
That's a serious fucking thing.
If you think about the way a little kid interfaceswith a film, a movie; for a little while they're
sort of confused about what's real and what'snot real when they're observing it, but there's
enough difference between sitting in a chairand watching a video and being in the world
that eventually you learn to recognize andseparate the two.
In VR, and as we get better and better atdoing it, that distinction goes away.
And this is quite important.
The line between what it means to be dreamingand what it means to be awake is going to
become very interesting, and it's going tobecome more and more interesting, because
remember VR is just one piece of a generalizedconsequence of accelerating technology.
So it's not just that we're going to be doingVR, we're also going to be radically improving
our actuation capacity in the world in general.
And so we can imagine circumstances whereI might craft an object in VR, and then—say
in quasi-real-time—some mechanism is infact actually 3D printing that object so then
I reach out, take off my VR glasses and thething that I thought I was creating in an
entirely imaginary space is actually physicallypresent in my hand.
That's going to cause some very interestingchanges in the way that we relate to the difference
between what reality can do and what imaginationcan do.
And as I mentioned to you in our sort of conversationbefore this thing started, as a consequence
of all this VR is particularly effective atblowing your mind.
And I mean in terms of disrupting your underlyingconstruct about what the nature of reality
happens to be.
And this is very good news and also extraordinarilybad news.
From the extraordinarily bad perspective itmeans that VR is extremely well-positioned
to create a designed reality that you're goingto have a very, very hard time rejecting.
If you think about the way that propaganda,back in the early 20th century, got good at
understanding how human beings parse informationto make decisions and getting in underneath
our psychological defense mechanisms, VR is100 million times more capable of engaging
in that.
The good news is, is if we do a much, muchbetter job at being—let's call it ethical—at
crafting a relationship between our powerto affect the world and the way that power
affects us, so if we do a much, much betterjob at being ethical around VR, then it will
be the most powerful tool that we have forradically improving the way that we respond
to the world, for upgrading our capacity torespond to the world, because it would be
a much more embodied and whole system hackfor our deep constructs.
Does that make sense?