Okay, so today we're going to talk about openness.
Now, you might say in some sense that opennessis the last discovered of the big five traits,
and it's also the one that comes up most weaklyin the factor analysis.
When Hans Eysenck formulated his trait representationwhich was extraversion, neuroticism, and psychoticism,
he felt that he encapsulated all of the fundamentalvariation in human personality and he was
loathe to include intelligence as a personalitytrait.
Now, the relationship between psychoticismand openness is rather complex.
Eysenck basically felt that people could beextraverted and that would be the positive
dimension, and could be high in negative emotionand that would be the negative emotion dimension,
and that they could also have a predispositionto psychosis.
He was thinking about the brain systems thatunderlie schizophrenia and that tendency to
dissociate and develop hallucinations, butalso maybe the systems in human beings that
are affected by hallucinogenic drugs, whichseem to affect human beings differently than
they affect other creatures.
Eysenck's psychoticism eventually was brokendown into low agreeableness and low conscientiousness--it
didn't predict the predisposition to psychosisat all.
And later factor analysis found that you couldload out intelligence and creativity as a
personality dimension separately.
Now, it's a bit tricky because you have IQmeasures and IQ measures are much more direct
measures of intelligence then the personalitymeasures.
I mean the personality measure is somethinglike: do you think you're smart?
You know, I'm being a bit flippant about thatbecause it's more sophisticated than that,
but when you talk about someone as a smartperson, you're generally referring to the
trait that we would describe as openness.
You also are doing that when you refer tocreativity as a predisposition.
And you can measure the smart part a lot betterwith IQ, and IQ is also a pretty good predictor
of creativity.
Well, so let's see how they're associated.
You remember that you have your big two traits--stabilityand plasticity--and stability breaks down
into conscientiousness, emotional stability,and agreeableness.
And then you can see how each of the aspectsare correlated--how highly they're correlated.
So industriousness and orderliness at about.4, volatility and withdrawal in emotional
stability--or neuroticism actually--about.6, and agreeableness and politeness at about
.4.
And then the next trait is extraversion andopenness--that makes plasticity--and people
who are high in plasticity tend to be goodentrepreneurs, by the way.
And extraversion breaks into assertivenessand enthusiasm, correlated at about .5, and
then openness and intelligence--the correlationthere is lower--it's .35.
The average correlation between the big 5is .2, and the correlation between the big
two is about .2.
And so you have to remember, you might askyourself, well is a correlation of .4 twice
as large as a correlation of .2?
And the answer to that is no, because youhave to square them to compare them arithmetically.
So a correlation of .2 gives you .04, 4% squared,and a correlation of .4 gives you 16% squared,
so there's actually a difference of a factorof 4.
And so you need to remember that when you'reconsidering effect sizes so that you can understand
exactly what they mean.
Now, if you're accounting for 16% of the variancewhich would be a correlation of .4, then that
leaves 84% left unexplained.
But that's a bit of an overstatement mostof the time in psychology because our measures
are rather imperfect and so, for example,if you give someone a personality test and
let's say that the validity of their selfreport is about .6 or .7, which is probably
what it is--maybe it might be a little bithigher than that--that means that their self-report
is only picking up 50% of the variation intheir personality.
And if an R derived from that measure accountsfor 16% of the variance, in some sense it's
twice as powerful as it appears to be.
Because the measure is so error-ridden.
And a lot of the things that we measure inpsychology are error-ridden, and what that
means is that the correlations--generallywhat it means, although not invariably--is
that the correlations are bigger than theylook.
In any case, the correlations that come upin personality research are certainly big
enough to be meaningful, and I would say meaningfulin terms of predicting major life outcomes
and predicting important economic outcomesand that sort of thing.
One of the things you might ask yourself is,exactly what does intelligence measure?
So we'll start with intelligence, and thatwould be equivalent to intellect roughly speaking.
So intellect in the big 5, the aspect seemsto be associated with interest in ideas.
Whereas the openness proper aspect seems tobe associated with aesthetic sensibility and
creativity.
That's the best way to think about it, asfar as we've been able to figure out.
And the biggest relationship is between intellectand intelligence, as measured psychometrically.
Now, intelligence is an interesting concept.
It's very controversial.
In fact, one of the things that continuallyhappens over and over again in psychology
is that psychologists discover all sorts ofnew kinds of intelligence, and the biggest
two proponents of that sort of thing I supposewere Bob Sternberg, who came up with this
thing he called practical intelligence, andthen Howard Gardner, who came up with the
theory of multiple intelligences, which hada very large effect on educational psychology
when the theory was first proposed.
And that's not saying much because, generallyspeaking, it's very difficult to find a discipline
that's more susceptible to fads than educationalpsychology.
As far as I can tell, generally speaking,each fad is worse than the previous one.
So, Gardner posited that, I think there were7 or 8 different intelligences: linguistic,
musical, logical, mathematical, spatial, body/kinaesthetic,intrapersonal, and interpersonal.
And people talk about emotional intelligenceand they talk about practical intelligence.
As far as I'm concerned, all of that's completerubbish.
And there's technical reasons for that.
I mean, there's technical and philosophicalreasons for that.
The first thing is, you can't just mess upa word.
You know, the whole point of having a wordis so that it defines some things, it describes
some things, and doesn't describe other things,right.
And so you can make the word intelligenceaccount for whatever you want.
And so you can say that the ability to danceis a form of intelligence.
But the problem with that is you blur outthe word so badly, you can't tell what it
means anymore.
And so I would also point out: we had perfectlygood words for those major intelligences.
We called them talents.
And so it's perfectly reasonable to make adistinction between a talent and intelligence.
Now you might say, well how the hell do youknow the difference?
If things look similar to some degree, thenhow do you know if they're the same or different?
Well that's exactly what you do when you dothe construct validity process.
So let's say you rated a number of peopleon their dancing ability.
And then you rated a number of people on theirability to multiply two two-digit numbers
in their head quickly.
Well then, you see technically, if both ofthose were intelligences, then the people
who could dance better could multiply two-digitnumbers faster in their head.
They would be slightly positively-- *coughs*--see that's what happens when I don't have
any diet coke.
So anyways, if intelligence was the rightword to subsume both of those, then what you'd
see is there'd be a high correlation.
The people who were good dancers would alsobe the ones who could multiply most rapidly--I
mean multiply in their head.
But you're not going to be able to extractout a single factor like that.
It's just not the case that those things associatelike that.
So for something to be one phenomena, thethings that it-- *coughs* -- obviously I've
talked too much this semester.
All the things that are subsumed under thatdefinition have to be correlated.
And highly correlated.
Because otherwise they're not the same thing.
It's the definition of the same thing.
Now IQ is a very peculiar construct, a veryunique construct from a psychological perspective.
But also, more generally, from a social scienceperspective because IQ has the most predictive
validity of anything ever discovered in thesocial sciences, period.
Now the other thing that is interesting aboutIQ is that a lot of the people who were interested
early in the measure of intelligence wereengineers turned psychologists.
And the engineers have actually had quitea whopping effect on psychology.
Part of the reason that psychology has anadvanced methodology and advances statistical
techniques is because we got invaded by engineersin the early part of the 20th century, and
so the engineers made our measurements muchmore rigorous than they would have otherwise
been and it's been a huge advantage.
I mean, one of the things that's happeningto psychology is that it's starting to eat
other disciplines.
It's had a massive effect on economics andit's going to have a massive effect on political
science.
And the reason for that is because we knowhow to measure things, and it actually turns
out to matter that you know how to measurethings.
Obviously, I mean if you're going to be talkingabout something that's specific and well-defined,
first of all, if you can't make it specificand well-defined, all you can really do is
argue about it.
And there are better and worse arguments,but the problem is that just because an argument
is good doesn't mean it's right.
And that's a big problem.
It's also something to remember when you'rearguing about people that you have a relationship
with because if you happen to be better atstructuring your arguments and you're more
verbally fluent, and perhaps more assertiveand perhaps less agreeable, you're going to
win the argument.
But that doesn't mean you're right.
Unfortunately it's not that simple.
And so as far as I can tell, the empiricalprocess is restricting or eliminating the
catastrophically detrimental effects of puretheory.
Well, and our measurement techniques havebeen pretty good about that.
Okay so now what happens with IQ here?
I can define IQ for you just so you know whatit is.
Imagine that you had a library of questions.
So here's some questions.
There's millions of questions in this databank.
What's 2 times 68?
What's the capital of Georgia?
What's the definition of hypertrixanemia?
What comes after in this sequence: 2, 4, 8,16?
Remember these numbers--so I'd tell you thenumbers and you'd have to tell me them back--2,
4, 1, 3, 5, 7, 6, 12, 15, 14, 18, 20, 22.
And then I might ask you, in fact, to rememberthem backwards, and that's a working memory
test.
Okay, so those are all questions that requireabstraction and mental operations: that's
the key as far as I can tell.
So you might say, exactly what constitutesan abstraction?
And it looks to me like what an abstractionis--there's the capacity to formulate an abstraction
and there's the capacity to manipulate them.
To formulate an abstraction, I think whatyou do is you take a phenomena and you represent
it with something that's low resolution.
That's more or less what an abstraction is.
So, for example, if I imagine this classroomlater, my imagined representation is going
to be of much lower resolution than the actualclassroom, but it's sufficient for certain
purposes.
Just like a thumbnail on a computer is sufficientfor certain purposes.
And then once I simplify the phenomena inquestion, then I can also perform certain
operations on it, say, in imagination or semantically,and the capacity to generate that abstraction
and the ability to manipulate those seemsto be the core element of intelligence.
And I think part of the reason why intelligence,roughly speaking, is a human dimension--although
obviously you can to some degree rank orderanimals in terms of their capacity to learn,
but there's this whopping differentiationbetween human beings and animals in this area
particularly--is because we can use abstractions.
Now, I heard a woman named Temple Grandinspeak once and it was a very interesting talk.
She's very autistic, but very brilliant, whichis not very common for people who are autistic
because usually it's associated with a substantialamount of intellectual impairment.
But she also had an extraordinarily devotedparent who spent almost all her time trying
to pull her daughter out of her autistic isolation.
Now Grandin has gone on to become a Universityof Chicago professor--and she works in the
agricultural area--and she has redesignedthe chutes, the walkways basically, that take
cattle to the slaughter house.
And she's done that to make them much lessstressful for the animals.
And part of the reason she can do that, asfar as she's concerned, is because she thinks
like an animal.
And what that means, as far as she can tell,is that she cannot generate an abstraction--not
easily.
Now she can speak so obviously she learnedto do it to some degree, but she talked more
about deficits in imagination or concretizationof imagination.
So one of the weird things that you see withautistic kids, not frequently but now and
then--there's actually a famous example ofthis on the web.
There's a guy, I think he's from Britain,and you can take him in a helicopter and fly
him over a city, and then he can stand infront of a piece of paper, like 12x8, start
anywhere, and draw the entire city.
Now and then you see autistic savants whoare children who can draw perfectly realistically,
and so maybe they'll draw a horse and theydon't even start the horse like a kid would--like
a normal kid would sketch the outline of thehorse and put some eyes in.
They put some eyes in and make the horse perfectlydetailed.
And what Grandin claimed was that-- she saidokay, you think of "house" or think of "church".
And she says, what comes to mind if you thinkof church?
And maybe she'd say, well you get this littleimage of something that's sort of shaped like
this with a steeped on top or a cross or somethinglike that, and that's a church.
And so maybe you think of house and it's likea little kid's house.
It's got a rectangle and a parallelogram--that'snot a parallelogram, whatever the hell you
call that thing on the top--and then it'sgot a chimney with smoke coming out of it,
right.
Two windows and a door.
House.
Yeah, but there are no houses like that.
Each individual house looks a lot differentthan that.
And so in order to have that conception ofhouse, essentially what you have to do is
you have to take that class of all possiblehouses and extract out the features that are
common across all of them.
And that's an abstraction.
And so, as far as Grandin's concerned, shedoesn't have abstractions like that.
When you ask her to think of "church", sheremembers "a church".
It's always singular instances.
Now the thing about human beings is that weperceive singular instances to some degree,
although I think our abstraction capacityoften interferes with our ability to do that.
But we also perceive abstractions.
And you can kind of tell this if you're evertrying to learn to draw.
Like if I say, draw a hand.
You guys, most of you unless you have artistictraining, you're going to draw what's essentially
a hieroglyphic hand.
I think the drawings that children come upwith aren't drawings; I think they're hieroglyphs.
They're abstracted representations that arequasi-linguistic.
They're not artwork, they're proto-language.
And hieroglyphs of course were one of theearliest forms of written language.
It makes sense, because if you want to communicateabout something, why not draw an image.
And eventually the image turns into a word.
But I actually think that's the developmentalprogression of language among human beings.
It's the abstracted image first and then it'sthe word.
Anyways, if you drew a hand, you'd likelydraw a hieroglyphic hand: 5 fingers or maybe
even 4, right, because that's what animatorsdo.
You can't fit all those sausages on one circle.
So they just simplify it down to 4 and noone even cares.
You watch an animated program, which is highlyabstracted--I mean Homer Simpson looks nothing
like an actual person.
Like really tremendously unlike an actualperson, and it's completely irrelevant.
After two or three seconds it doesn't matterat all.
Which is also why I think 3D movies--it'snever a technology that's ever caught on.
Because after the first 4 seconds, who thehell cares.
It's irrelevant whether you see in three dimensionsbecause you don't need much information to
actually structure your perception.
Now if you want to see your hand--weirdlyenough--so that you can draw it, you have
to snap out of your normal mode of perception.
I find often it's a lot easier to do thatwith one eye closed because it flattens it
out.
And then you have to stop looking at yourhand as if it's a hand.
You have to look at it again like it's anobject.
And as soon as you do that it's actually rathershocking because it's such a strange looking
thing.
If you put your hand in a non-canonical position*gestures* --that's a canonical position,
I would say--if you put your hand in a non-canonicalposition and then look at it, it's the weirdest
shaped thing.
It's quite shocking to see it, you know.
And then you can draw it--once you can actuallysee it like that--but before that, you're
pretty much stuck in "hand".
So anyways, I think what happens with intelligenceis that people are capable of abstracting
and then they can manipulate abstractions.
And so let's take another look at what abstractionsmight be.
Now part of the reason that I think abstractionis so useful is because things are really
really complicated and it's going to be alot more difficult to manipulate the actual
thing than to manipulate some representativeabstraction of it.
So if you could get an abstraction that capturesthe gist of the entity--now how we do that
is not exactly obvious--but if you can, thenyou can expend a lot more resources concentrating
on the relevant parts of the entity and alot less time concentrating on the irrelevant
parts.
So for example if you ask a child to drawa house, what colour the house is is irrelevant.
Now why it's irrelevant is not exactly obvious.
I guess it's because colour can vary acrosshouses.
And colour varies across all sorts of otherthings, and so colour turns out to be a non-canonical
element of "house" and so you can just dispensewith it when you're thinking about a house.
You'd say, well it doesn't matter what colourthe house is--it's still a house.
So what exactly defines those features thatmake something a house rather than something
else are not that easy to figure out.
You could say, well, a house has four wallsand a roof.
And those are the external walls and I guessyou could identify the minimal necessary components,
but even that's not so simple.
And you could say a house is also somethingthat someone lives in, which allows you to
put caves as houses because caves obviouslyshare very little in common with the standard
house.
My point is that it's difficult exactly tofigure out what set of features we do use
to determine whether something is a memberof a class.
There's this guy named Gigerenzer who’sthought about this a lot, and he thinks that
they're a combination of objective and functional,basically.
And that enables us to do things like comeup with a category of "things you would take
from your apartment if it was on fire".
Which is a really interesting category becausemost of the things that you're going to take
bear very little resemblance--it's hard tosee why they make a category.
Pets, family members--probably in that order--photoalbums, identification, what else might you
take?
Your phone, I suppose.
What else would you take out of an apartmentduring a fire?
Well you guys would be out on the street starknaked obviously.
Well you get the point is that those thingsthat I just mentioned seem to share very little
in terms of objective features in common,but there's some reason that they still cohere
as a category.
Alright, so why do you need to abstract?
Well, because you can handle the complexityof the world better.
Even your perception is a form of abstraction,you know, because when you look at someone,
a lot of the abstraction is done for you becauseyou just can't perceive very well, but when
you look at someone--first of all, you onlysee the surface of them that's facing you
and not the other surface, so that's a biglimitation.
You only see them now in this split second,rather than extended across time.
You don't see any of their microstructurebeyond the general pattern of the physiology
at this level of resolution.
You don't see anything beyond that.
I can't see your cells or your organs or anythinglike that, which is actually a real problem
often for us.
And I can't see the systems that you're partof.
So right off the bat, just to perceive givesyou a low resolution representation, and a
lot of that is limitations of your processing.
Your eyes just can't zoom in that far.
You don't have the cortical capacity to improveyour vision.
Plus, how much do you really want to see atone time?
No more than necessary, whatever that means.
And evolution seems to take care of that problem.
So your perception abstracts for you rightaway, but then I would say maybe you make
a leap from perception to conception, somethinglike that.
And so that would be the leap from the perceptionof the actual object to the image of the object,
and then a leap from the image of the objectto the word.
So it looks to me that a word is a representationof an image which is a representation of an
object or a situation--it's something likethat.
And you need those because you have to dealwith a complex world.
So here's one way of thinking about it.
Look at the top left corner of that diagram.
I call that the thing in itself, and whatit is is an array of dots, roughly speaking,
and--I think there's 350 dots there--and youmight say, well--and then if it was a real
world object you could imagine that wouldbe in three dimensions, not two, because that's
two, and it would be transformed because itwould be also extended across time.
And it would have microstructures that werefar smaller than that and macrostructures
that were far bigger, so even that is an abstraction,but I'm using a fairly complex abstraction
to represent the thing in itself.
That's the thing you cannot perceive, right.
What something actually is.
You just get an image.
And then the next five things are ways youcould look at that.
So you could say, well, it's a rectangle.
You could say it's four rectangles, and forgetabout the dots.
You could say that it's--I think that's 16lines or, what is it, 32 lines?
24 lines.
So if that thing in itself was an orchardand you were going to walk south to north
through it, that would be a good representation.
Those would be corridors, roughly speaking,and then object four is a combination of object
one and object two.
And then object five is, well, all that'sblurred out are the little groups of six dots.
And so you might say, well, what is that thing?
And then the answer is, well it's any of thosefive things.
And so that's an interesting way of thinkingabout it too because one of the things it
shows you is that you can disagree about whatsomething is right at the level of perception.
And then you might say well which of thoseis the best representation?
And the first answer might be, well, the mostcomplex one: the one in the left-hand corner.
But that's not necessarily the case--it mightdepend on what you want the representation
for.
Like imagine--it's weird, it's weird--becauseimagine you have a map, okay.
And so you think, well I'm going to make thebest map in the world, and so you make a map
that's exactly the same size as the territorythat it represents and has all the detail.
Well that's not any use at all, that thing,because you could just use the territory,
right?
Just because, as a map gets increasingly detailed,to some degree, it's increasingly useless
as a map.
And so what you need is this weird combinationbetween accuracy and simplicity.
And so you want your map to be no more complicatedthan is necessary than to take you from point
A to point B, that's it.
Because otherwise, it wouldn't be simple touse and the additional complexity would limit
the utility of the map.
So you might say that what we're trying todo with our intelligence is to get what we
need with the least amount of effort possible.
And there's a sort of Piagetian idea that'slurking behind that, which is: you have limited
resources, you don't want to expend more energythan is necessary, and you want to build representations
of the world that suffice to keep you goingnow and then next week and next month, and
then along and then in groups.
And so you build a representation of the worldthat has some concordance of the thing in
itself, but has this functional simplicityso that you can actually use it in the real
world.
Alright, so back to this diagram.
So I've got the object and five representations,and then there are ways of representing it
linguistically at the bottom.
What that is--the words are basically a simplificationof something that's already simplified.
So intelligence seems to have something todo with the process of functional simplification.
Now, back to the library of questions.
So you have this database of questions andso then what is you is pull out a hundred
questions, randomly.
Alright, and you want to pick out a hundredbecause if you just pick out one--like if
I asked you what the capital of Georgia wasand I asked you what the capital of Georgia
was, and you got it wrong and you got it right,I couldn't really say with any degree of certainty
that that means that you have more intelligence.
Because the probability that I'd get an accuratemeasure with one question is quite low, but
if I used three questions, well then, I wouldstart to become--my measurement would start
to become less error-ridden, and if I used10 it would even be better, and if I used
20...
For a personality questionnaire, the ruleof thumb--and this is just a rule of thumb--is
that, if you don't have 20 questions in thequestionnaire then you don't have enough questions
to really generate a reliable measure.
So you'll still see single item measures usedin psychology, but you can add additional
accuracy by increasing the number of items.
I designed an IQ test a while back and wegot a pretty good reliability and pretty good
validity.
Reliability is, you know, you test the sameset of people twice and the rank order of
their performance stays the same.
So if you got 90 on the previous on the previoustest you'd get 90, and if you got 95, because
you're more intelligent in this example, ifyou got 95 on the last one you'd get 95 on
this one.
So that's reliability.
We could get a pretty reliable IQ test withnine items, but it was substantially improved
with 17.
And with increments you get a, what wouldyou call it, diminishing returns.
So a hundred is plenty.
Okay, so you pull out a hundred questionsand then you take 100 people and you gave
them those questions, and then you score them--rightand wrong, that's all there is--and then you
sum the scores.
Okay, so basically, the sum behaves like theaverage--let's say you average the scores
just to make the argument a little bit morestraightforward.
You average the scores, and so each of yougets the average calculated across the times
that you were right and wrong, so it's anapproximation of the frequency of how right
you were, and then we rank order you: 1 to100.
That's IQ.
That's all there is to it.
Now people say IQ doesn't exist.
Well, that's annoying, because all they'redoing is gerrymandering the definition of
the word exist.
You know, because you can do that: if youask if A is equivalent to B, the answer is,
it depends on what you mean by A and whatyou mean by B. It's almost always a foolish
question because you can take B and A andbend them and twist them in such a way that
you can make one thing another thing withouttoo much problem.
People usually get around that by only usinga word in a context, right--in a sentence
or a phrase or a paragraph that defines theword so that you can't weasel around like
that.
But more specifically in psychology, we havemethods to tell if something is real, and
if IQ doesn't pass the test of reality fora psychological measure, then no other psychological
measures pass the test because they're validatedexactly the same way IQ is, and they don't
work as well.
So you can say, well no, that's not real,but then you have to throw out--you probably
have to throw out the social sciences completelyinsofar as they're actually sciences.
Because the same statistics are used to generatetheir findings.
So you can't just say, well this really powerfulthing doesn't exist while a bunch of these
weak things exist and they're measured thesame way.
You don't get to play that game.
Okay, so does it exist?
Well you can measure it reliably, so that'sdefinitely something.
You know, because you might say, well doesyour shadow exist?
Well, generally speaking under normal conditionsyou could measure your shadow relatively reliably.
Does it exist?
Well, it passes one test of existence.
You can't detect it with a number of senses--youcan't touch it--for example, but whether or
not something exists is actually a rathertricky question.
But you can measure it and it's useful, and that's
not a bad definition of "exist".
So, what's it good for?
Well, it predicts major life outcomes, andimportantly.
And we can talk about the power of intelligencemomentarily.
If you were actually going to calculate anIQ score per se, you would take the rank order
that I just described and you would correctif for age, because you can't really expect
a 7 year old to know as much as a 15 yearold or a 20 year old, so generally speaking
if you take a technical IQ test, it will rankorder you but it will only rank order you
with people the same age as you.
So that's just another, you know, it's anadditional correction, whether or not that
actually gives you a more accurate estimateof IQ depends on what you mean by accurate.
A very bright 7 year old generally doesn'tknow enough to do much useful in the way of
work, but they can learn extremely quickly,and so if you compare 7 year olds to people
of other ages purely in terms of their scoreon an IQ test, there's a high probability
that you would underestimate their speed oflearning.
By the same token though, by the time you're40 you have a lot of accumulated knowledge,
and so if you only measured learning speedthen you would overestimate the 7 year old's
advantage over the 40 year old.
IQ is basically a unitary phenomena, but youcan fractionate it into...it's very very complicated,
for reasons that I'll tell you about in aminute.
If you had to divide IQ into two, the wayyou would divide it would be into crystallized
and fluid intelligence.
And fluid intelligence would be, roughly,the ability to learn.
And crystallized intelligence would be, roughly,a measure of how much you've learned.
Now those are separate to some degree, andhere's why they're separate: as you age, your
capacity to learn decreases.
It's quite ugly.
So by the time you're about 24, you're startingto get stupider, from the perspective of being
able to learn.
And that's just pretty much a linear tripdownhill until you depart the world.
So it's nasty to see because it's quite asteep generation.
You can stave that off, by the way, with cardiovascularexercise and weightlifting--so that's the
best way to keep your learning capacity intact.
It's not to do cognitive exercises, it's todo physical exercises.
And then as you age, the amount you know goesup and what happens is those two things actually
tend to average out.
Now you might say, well if I'm claiming thatIQ is a unitary thing, how can I make the
claim that you can divide it into two elementsand that those elements are in some sense
separate.
And I think the reason is for this: your prefrontalcortex, roughly speaking--so that's the part
of your brain here forward--you can thinkabout in part, it's the part that does the
programming of motor activity--voluntary motoractivity--but it also seems to be...so let's
say you're doing something new and you'repretty clunky and awkward at it, and then
you do it more and more and you get smootherand smoother and smoother at it, and you automatize
it.
What happens is you're using your prefrontalcortex and, to some degree, your whole right
hemisphere as you're first doing it, and thenas you get better and better at it the ability
shifts to the left and then goes backwards.
So what's happening, to some degree, is yourprefrontal cortex is programming the rest
of your brain.
And you can think of fluid intelligence asa measure of the ability of your brain to
program itself, and crystallized ability asa measure of how much programming is there.
So they're separate in that manner becausethey perform separate functions, but then
you can also understand that the better yourprogrammer is, the better your programming
is going to be so that inflates the correlation.
And so you can have to separate things functionally--thatare even dissociable in terms of age--but
because they work so tightly together--it'slike, how fast can you dig a hole and how
big is the pile of dirt?
Well obviously those two things are differentin some important sense, but they're going
to be highly correlated because the fasteryou can dig a hole, the bigger the pile of
dirt.
So anyways, crystallized intelligence is alsooften measured as verbal intelligence, but
the better measure fundamentally is crystallizedintelligence.
Now, you know how we looked at the personalityhierarchy, right--that was this *gestures
to slide*.
And what you see is three strata, roughlyspeaking: aspect, trait, superfactor.
And it looks like--the superfactors, I wouldsay, the validity of those superfactors is
not yet clear.
You can get a lot of useful prediction bylooking at the traits, and there's more and
more evidence--there's about 400 studies nowusing the aspects--there's more and more evidence
that you can also derive additional usefulpredictive validity from differentiating the
personality down to the aspect level.
So that's the highest resolution personalitylevel we have.
There are people who claim that there's somethingat the apex which you might call "good personality",
but I don't think so.
I think it's--I don't think so.
You'd have to read the literature to understandthe dispute--it's a statistical dispute roughly
speaking--but we've found in our researchthat stability and plasticity are only correlated
at 0.2.
They're pretty separate.
So I'm going to stick with that for now eventhough it might be wrong.
Okay, so 
if you read the cognitive literature and theneuropsychological literature, you will find
that neuropsychologists tend to assume thatthere are forms of cognitive ability that
you cannot describe as IQ.
And they make that claim because they'll takea test and they'll use the test to measure
something, and then they'll correlate thatwith IQ and the correlation will only be about
0.2 or 0.3.
And they'll say, well that's not a high enoughcorrelation to justify saying that those things
are identical--because the correlation shouldbe more like 0.8 for them to be identical.
But the problem is, let's say I had a measureif your IQ and your IQ and your IQ and your
IQ, and then I asked you two questions, andyou and you and you, and I summed your answers,
whether they correct or incorrect.
Now what would happen is, there'd be somecorrelation between your total score on those
two questions and your overall IQ.
Maybe it would be 0.3.
But that wouldn't justify me in claiming thatthe two question IQ test is different from
the full scale IQ test--it's just worse.
And you're going to run into this problemwhen you read psychological literature and
if you ever do any research because it's verydifficult to determine whether you get what's
called "discriminant validity" which is, thisthing measures this thing, and this thing
measures this thing, and they're actuallydifferent.
Or whether you just have a lousy measure ofthis and a lousy measure of this and so the
correlation is low.
Now here's a neuropsychological test, andyou can make the case that this is measuring
something different than IQ.
So imagine that you see an array of 12 pictures--they'rejust drawings, drawings of a telephone and
a booth and a chair--just common objects.
So you see 12 of them.
And then you have to click one, and then whenyou do that, they move.
And then the next time you have to click oneyou haven't already clicked.
And then they move again and you click, andthen they move again and you click.
And you see by about the time that you getto about 8 of them, you're starting to run
into trouble because it's difficult to remembermore than 8 abstractions simultaneously--7
actually, and some people claim it's as lowas 4--that's the capacity of working memory.
Which is why we kind of like phone numbersto be 7 digits long.
A lot of the things we want to just rememberare 7 units long, and if we want to remember
more than that, we chunk.
Although if I show you some dots *draws dots*how many dots?
3.
You don't have to count them.
You can see 3 dots. *draws more dots* Youcan see 4 dots.
It's not obvious that you can see 5 dots.
At that point you start to go "3 and 2".
And then if there's 6 dots, well that's howthey would be arranged on a dice, right.
The reason they'd be arranged on a dice thatway is because you can see two sets of three
and infer 6.
You know, if they're sort of randomly dispersedlike that, and I say well how many dots is
that, well you have to count them.
And what that shows you is that your workingmemory--which is really a function of fluid
intelligence--is a very very narrow thing.
And it's like your vision.
You know, remember we saw the gorilla video,right, and you can only pick up the thing
that you're attending to.
Well working memory is like that, it's thisnarrow narrow form of attention and it sort
of specifies unitary phenomena--I mean that'snot quite unitary but it's close enough.
And I think the reason it does that--it'slike, why's your attention so narrow--is because
often what you're trying to do as you workin the world is to make binary choices.
You know, you don't want to choose between20 things, you want to choose between two
things, because then when you choose betweentwo things you can actually act.
If it's still two things you can't act, ifit's one thing you can act.
So imagine you go into a Chinese restaurantis a good example, because Chinese restaurants
virtually always have like 400 items on themenu. and you might ask yourself, well how
the hell do you figure out what you want.
And what you don't do is go through everysingle menu item and contemplate it because
then you'd be there for a week.
So what you seem to do is eradicate chunks.
So you might say, well I'm not in the moodfor anything but fish.
Okay, bang, three-quarters of the menu disappears.
You know, and then you might go, well I don'twant it breaded.
Whack, and then another half is gone and nowyou're down to maybe 8 choices.
And, you know, you reduce that to 4 and thento 2 perhaps.
Well I'd like this or I'd like that.
But the waiter doesn't care about that.
The waiter wants to know which one you want,because until it's reduced to one you don't
get to act.
And so the reduction, the reduced narrow stripthat we use to perceive the world in partly
is a consequence of processing inadequacy.
But it's also partly because we really aretrying to reduce things all the time to 0
and 1, yes and no.
Okay, so back to the three stratum theoryof cognitive abilities.
Now, you've got this array of 12 items andit keeps shifting.
And what I would do is score you by the numberof duplications--if you pick the same item
more than once, you lose a point.
So the maximum points you can get is 12 and,you know, people usually make 3 or 4 mistakes.
And so I can take your score on that test--maybeI'd give it to you 2 or 3 times just to make
sure I have a reasonably stable indicator--andthen I could correlate it with your full-scale
fluid IQ.
And I'd get a correlation of about 0.25 or0.3.
Now, if you don't know anything about psychometricsyou'd say, well that's obviously measuring
something different than full scale IQ becauseit only correlates at 0.25 or 0.3.
But what it turns out is, no: it's more analogousto the problem that we were just talking about
where I asked you three questions and triedto derive your entire IQ from that.
It's just a bad measurement.
Now what happens is if you take the neuropsychologicaltests that people have developed, that theoretically
assess the different parts of the brain, andyou factor analyze them and you extract out
a single factor, the single factor looks exactlylike fluid intelligence.
Now, is it exactly the same as fluid intelligence?
The onus would be on the person who claimsit's not to demonstrate the difference.
We did give university students a very extensivebattery of pre-frontal-cortical tests and
measured their IQ, and then we used the pre-frontal-corticaltest average and the IQ to predict grades.
And what we did find was the pre-frontal testspredicted over and above the IQ.
But we thought maybe, if you took the pre-frontalaverage and IQ and you added them to predict
grades, say--that's a regression analysis--theyboth added in.
So they predicted different parts of the variation.
It added additional necessary information.
However, if you took all the neuropsychologicaltests and all the individual IQ tests and
you put them in one data set and then extractedout a single factor--so that would be fluid
intelligence, roughly speaking--that predictedgrades very well.
And then what was left over didn't predictat all.
So what we concluded was that neuropsychologicaltests--pre-frontal-cortical tests--test intelligence,
and they test a slightly different thing thanfluid intelligence tests do, but that isn't
because they're testing something different,it's because fluid intelligence tests the
way they're currently constituted--don't samplethe universe of potential questions as well
as they should.
So it wasn't that we discovered somethingdifferent, we discovered a measurement error,
roughly speaking.
That only took 5 years by the way.
It took 5 years to figure that out.
It was very annoying because when we startedI was trying to predict grades, you know,
and I didn't know the IQ literature very wellat that point, because psychologists don't
usually teach it very much, because IQ bothersthe hell out of everybody.
And so, and the neuropsychologists who havetheir own field are motivated to make the
claim that they've discovered something newand I just took that on face value.
But then we tried to predict--like okay ifI'm going to predict how well you do at your
job, well I want to get a good cognitive measurebecause if it's a complex job it keeps changing
and you have to learn to keep up, and if youcan't do that, you're not going to do very
well.
So that would be bad for you and it wouldbe bad for everyone around you.
And so we were trying to pick up additionalinformation that would enable the accuracy
of the prediction to be increased, and lookedat the neuropsych literature but, at most,
it was an ambivalent success.
(00:49:25)Okay, so how does that relate to this?
Well at the bottom tier, where it's the mostdifferentiated, you have single tests.
And they're only correlated with each otherat about 0.2, maybe 0.3.
So you might say, well, they're all measuringdifferent things--they're not.
They're all measuring the same thing badly.
And then you might clump them.
So let's say I ask you--oh god--maybe I giveyou a test that asks you--that tested your
vocabulary with 6-letter words, and then Igave you another test that tested your vocabulary
with 7-letter words, and then another onethat tested your vocabulary with 8-letter
words.
And I said, well those are all different tests.
Well they would correlate quite highly--notperfectly--but I could clump them together
and make one sort of super test out of them.
And then I could take supertest A and supertestB and supertest C and look at the correlations
between those, and those would climb to about0.5 or 0.6.
And then if I clumped the supertests together,which would be happening by the time we got
to stratum 2 there, then the correlation betweenthe tests would start to rise to about 0.7.
And then if I collapsed all the supertestsinto a single measure, then the correlation
between any of those stratum 2 tests and G,because that would be the highest level thing--G
is general intelligence, that's roughly speakingfluid intelligence--the correlation between
any of the supertests and G would be about0.8.
So the point of all this--there's no way ofdiscussing this sort of thing without doing
it statistically and technically because theyare statistical and technical processes.
So what happens is that, now let's say nowyou have a measure of fluid intelligence.
Okay, you've got this measure.
And you take one of the stratum 2 sets oftests and you use both to predict academic
achievement.
What happens is that the superfactor, G, killsthe rest of them.
You're just not going to be able to find anyof the tests in the bottom strata that are
going to add to the prediction of what thegeneral factor can give you.
Now with personality, that's just not thecase.
You can't pull out a single factor that predictshow personality is going to influence job
performance across your life.
If you add neuroticism--if you take a singlefactor and you add neuroticism, neuroticism
is going to kick the single factor out.
Conscientiousness is going to kick the singlefactor out, and so forth.
Because there isn't a single factor.
It's not--the tests aren't highly correlatedenough to say that they're all measuring the
same thing to some degree.
The personality traits really are different.
You know, you can clump them into plasticityand stability, but even there you're maintaining
a lot of validity.
So if I took stability and used conscientiousnessto predict job performance, conscientiousness
would wipe out stability--it'd be a bettermeasure.
But you never get that--you virtually neverget that with the lower tests in the IQ strata.
Okay, now *mumbling*.
That's a good representation of how thesethings are associated.
So at the bottom you have the single testsand then they chunk into, say, sequential
reasoning, quantitative reasoning, and inductionon the fluid intelligence side, and general
knowledge and language development on thecrystallized intelligence side--that's the
red--and then they're all subsumed underneathfluid intelligence, which is the measure that
you really want to have.
Okay, so what good is that?
Well, it basically correlates 0.5 with majorlife outcomes.
And that's 25% of the variance, and maybeyou can get it a bit higher than that, but
we'll just stick with 0.5 as a representation.
And so, let's say you take a bunch of students, 100 of them,
and you want to sort them into those who willpass the class with a 50% failure rate.
So you just pick them randomly--you're goingto pass, you're going to fail, you're going
to pass, you're going to fail.
So that's no knowledge.
I have no predictive knowledge whatsoever.
So my validity--the validity of my classificationis basically going to be equivalent to chance:
zero.
Right, I'm only going to have a 50% chanceof picking who passes and who fails.
If I used IQs--if I had all your IQ scores--andI did the prediction, I'd get it right 75%
of the time.
So it's a huge difference.
It cuts the failure rate in half by usingIQ.
And IQ is a very good predictor of health,it's a predictor of longevity, it's a predictor
of resistance to post traumatic stress disorder,it's a predictor of--obviously--occupational
status, it's a prediction of educational success,it's a predictor of income.
It's a very powerful predictor.
And here's another way of conceptualizingits effects.
So imagine you could choose how you were goingto be when you were born--this is in North
America because it's going to vary by society,at least to some degree.
You get to be born into a family that's atthe 95th percentile for wealth, or you get
to be born at the 95th percentile for intelligence.
Who's better off at the age of 40?
And the answer is the person who picks beingborn with an IQ in the 95th percentile at
birth.
It's a more powerful predictor of long-termlife outcome than familial wealth.
And it shows up everywhere.
One of the things we did recently was lookat disgust sensitivity--we're going to talk
a little bit about that when we talk aboutconscientiousness because orderly people seem
to be more sensitive to disgust than disorderlypeople.
That seems to be why they’re orderly.
But, the higher you are in IQ, the less disgustsensitive you are.
Now we don't know exactly why that is.
Maybe it's because, you know, maybe you couldmake the inference that IQ is related in some
way to the physiological integrity of thecortex rather than the limbic system, which
is the source of, say, emotions and motivations.
And the more powerful it is, the more inhibitorycapacity it has over the more fundamental
motivations and emotions.
You could make that case.
The problem is that intelligent people don'tnecessarily seem to be any less impulsive,
so... and you can have a pretty vicious personalitydisorder that's characterized by extremely
disorganized behaviour and a complete inabilityto put long term plans into operation, and
still have a high IQ.
So, one of the things we really can't figureout--it's just a hell of a thing to try to
figure out.
Like the relationship between IQ and industriousnessis zero.
And that just makes no sense to me becausemost of the brain models are predicated on
the idea that your ability to engage in long-termplanning is a factor that's associated with
intelligence.
But then industriousness people seem to notonly engage in long-term planning, they seem
to do it right so that if they're more industriousand they put their plans into operation, then
the plans seem to actually work.
But it's not correlated with IQ.
So then I can't figure out, well obviouslythe industrious person, in some way, is able
to regulate their own behaviour.
You know, well they're not procrastinating,for example.
And you'd think that that--the ability tonot procrastinate--would be a cognitive feature,
but it doesn't seem to be.
And we have no idea what makes people industrious,and we can't figure it out.
So it's this incredibly potent predictor--it'sjust about as powerful as IQ--and we have
no idea what it is.
So if you think you have a smart idea aboutthat and you want to pursue it, feel free
because there's a big mystery there that noone's been able to crack.
And we've been at it for a long time and havehad almost no success.
You know, we had people do things like, we'dgive them sentences of n’s, m's and u's--sort
of randomly distributed--and then we'd havethem count the u's.
You know, like a whole page of sentences--they’renot sentences, they're just strings of letters.
Count the u's--how useless!
You'd think that someone industrious woulddo that better.
They don't.
That's an IQ test.
The people who can count the u's faster havehigher IQs.
Almost everything that you would do whereit has to do with manipulations of abstractions
of any sort--even something that basic--seemsto be fundamentally associated with IQ.
People with higher IQs have slightly biggerheads, if you control for body size.
They have slightly bigger brains, if you controlfor body size.
The axons on their neurons are a bit thicker,so the electrical messages seem to travel
a little bit more efficiently.
They are slightly faster in simple reflextests.
So it goes right down to the level of...becausea simple reflex--a light goes on, you push
a button--there's not many neurons mediatingthat response.
You know, chains of neurons.
There's only a few neurons communicating sothat you can do that.
But even at that relatively simple processinglevel, IQ is associated with speed.
So there's a physiological component.
You're less likely to develop Alzheimer'sdisease if you have a high IQ.
And maybe that's just because your brain ismore robust.
You know, so you could sustain damage, say,of up to 50% of your brain and you wouldn't
even show it if you have a sufficiently highIQ.
Whereas if you're on the bottom end of theIQ distribution, you're much more--you seem
to be much more susceptible to physiologicaldamage.
Nutrition is a big predictor of IQ variation.
And a lot of that's been hammered out of modernsocieties.
You know, so 150 years ago people's IQ waspretty tightly associated with their nutritional
status, but now there are very few peoplein North America who don't have enough to
eat, even though there's some variation inquality of diet.
And that's flattened out a lot of the culturalvariability in intelligence.
Okay, so this guy named Hemphill did thispaper--an American psychologist a while back--and
one of the things he was interested in doing--rememberwe talked about effect sizes, right.
How big is an effect in psychology or in socialsciences in general?
And people have used rules of thumb that 0.5was a moderate effect and 0.3 was a minimal
effect and 0.2 was starting to diminish tothe point of non-utility.
But what Hemphill did instead of guessing,because that was just a guess, was actually
go and look at papers that were publishedin psychology to see what effect sizes were
being reported.
So it's empirical analysis of how big theeffects that psychologists and other social
scientists report.
And so what he found was that the highestthird of paper or the third of papers that
had the biggest effects reported effects from0.35 to 0.78, the middle third from 0.21 to
0.33, and the lower third from 0.02 to 0.21.
*mumbling* If you look on the left side hereyou see an r of less than 0.15 characterizes
the first quarter of published studies.
An r of 0.15 to 0.35, the next quartile.
So 50% of psychological studies report anr of less than 0.35.
90% report an r of less than 0.5, and only7 to 8% report an r of 0.5 or above.
So what that means is that the relationshipbetween IQ and, say, academic performance
or long-term life income is higher than thatreported in all but about 5% of psychology
studies.
Okay so here's an interesting--you might say,again, in order to determine that something
exists, you have to be able to measure itand then it has to be good for something.
So it has to be grippable and it has to beuseable as a tool, we'll say for the sake
of argument.
What sort of IQ do you need for what kindof job?
This was derived from a company called Wonderlic,and Wonderlic does employment testing.
Psychologists usually don't use the Wonderlictest.
It's a relatively short IQ test, and it'sa good test.
I think psychologists don't use it becauseit was developed commercially, but we tested
the Wonderlic out a lot and it has excellentpsychometric properties.
It's a very good IQ test.
It probably errs a little bit in testing crystallizedIQ rather than fluid IQ, but we won't argue
about that for the time being.
Alright so, if you have an IQ from 116 to130, that puts you in the 86th to 95th percentile.
Right, so that means you're minimally--ifthere were 8 people in a room, on average
you'd be the smartest person.
I should tell you, just so you know, thatif you're a state college student--we'll use
the US as an example because there's moredifferentiation between the American universities
in terms of quality than there is the Canadianuniversities--if you're in an average American
post-secondary institution, your IQ is 115.
And so, you think, that's not all that bright.
But that's brighter than 7 out of 8 peoplein the general population.
And so the are as many people--if you lookat the North American distribution...so you
have the 50th percentile in the middle ofthe normal distribution, you have the 85th
percentile here, and you have the 15th percentilehere.
So about 70% of people fall between the 15thand the 85th percentile.
At the 15th percentile you're not really veryliterate.
And so what that means is that in the UnitedStates there's just as many people who aren't
literate as there are people who are in college.
And what I would mean by literate is not somuch--like here's a bare bones definition
of literate: you can follow written instructions.
And so what that means is it's kind of a two-foldissue, right.
You can make out the words and the phrasesand the sentences, but then you can translate
them into actual action--you can use themas information.
And at 85 you're going to have not a verygood time doing that.
And so, when you're wondering things aboutthe way society is structured and why people
don't necessarily make the most intellectuallysophisticated choices, one thing that's very
much worth remembering is that there's justas many people who are functionally illiterate
in north America as there are people who arein tier-one colleges.
It's quite shocking.
Anyways, okay so you want to be an attorney,a research analyst, an editor, an advertising
manager, a chemist, an engineer, an executive,a systems analyst, an auditor--so you're up
in the professional levels there.
You need an IQ of at least 116.
And so 130 would be better.
My suspicions are that the average IQ of peoplein this room is about 120 to 125.
It might be a little higher than that.
It's hard to measure IQ in the U of T populationbecause a lot of people have English as a
second language and so that makes it harderto measure crystallized intelligence obviously
using an English language test.
But we've found, when we've done our studiesat the U of T, that the average exceeds 120.
So, you know, so you guys have the cognitivepower to basically pursue professional level
careers.
From 110 to 115: manager, supervisor, programmer,teacher, general manager, purchasing agent,
registered nurse, sales account executive.
These are actually empirically derived, bythe way.
So the Wonderlic company has tested a verylarge number of people.
And so these are the actual averages of theprofessions that they are describing--it's
not hypothetical.
103 to 108, so that's the 60 to the 70th percentile:clerk, customer service rep, computer operator,
medical debt collector, secretary, accountingclerk, general sales, telephone sales, assistant
manager, credit clerk, drafter, designer,bookkeeper.
There's a lot of white-collar, like low level,entry level, white collar jobs in that particular
category.
So that would be the brighter people amongthe high school students who didn't go to
college and university.
IQ, this is dead average, 50th to the 55thpercentile: police officer, receptionist,
cashier, general clerical staff, inside salesclerk, meter reader, printer, teller, data
entry, electrical, helper, dispatcher, generaloffice.
So that's right at 100.
95 to 98, so that's the 42nd to the 45th percentile:quality control checker, claims clerk, security
guard or unskilled labourer.
So look, the unskilled labourers are up at95th of 98, so that's--at the unskilled labour
level you still have an IQ that's higher than40% of the population.
Ark welder, die setter, mechanic, medicaldental assistant.
IQ 87 to 93: messenger, factory productionworker, assembler, food service worker, nurse's
aid, warehouseman, custodian, janitor, materialhandler, and packer.
Okay, so now what you see happening--it looksto me like you can conceptualize jobs most
simply with a two by two matrix.
Okay, so there's managerial/administrativejobs and creative jobs--that's the first one--and
then there's low complexity/high complexity.
And so, what you're starting to fall intoat the 21st to the 37th percentile--so that's
still one person in three--are low complexity,managerial jobs.
And so what I mean by that is, if you're ina low complexity job, imagine you're responsible
for 30 things.
But roughly speaking, it's the same 30 thingsall the time.
And roughly speaking, they have to be takencare of the same way each time.
So you have a finite domain of responsibilityand you can master it.
And IQ will predict how fast you master it,but once you master it, it won't predict how
well you do.
What happens then, in all likelihood, is thatconscientiousness starts to predict, or maybe
emotional stability starts to predict, orsome of the other personality factors start
to become more important.
So, but at 87 to 93, you're down at the levelof custodian and janitor.
And then that's that.
And that's not so good because you have thebottom 15-20% of the population who don't
have a cognitive ability at that level.
And so one of the things that you're goingto hear a lot about as you get older is reasons
for unemployment.
And one of the prime reasons for unemploymentin the future is increasingly going to be
that there is just nothing for someone ofthat level of intelligence to do.
And this is partly why people hate IQ, becauseyou think, that is a nasty nasty thing to
conclude.
Let me tell you a story.
So, I had a client at one point who I suspectedhe had a verbal IQ of about 85 and a non-verbal
IQ that was lower.
He had other psychological issues, but we'lljust concentrate on that one for the time
being.
And he had a hard time finding a job.
He was socially anxious and that didn't help,but even if he could overcome that it was
very difficult for him to master the basicskills that were involved in what you would
consider even relatively straightforward tasks.
I spent a lot of time trying to find him ajob, which was insanely difficult.
He went to the government first to get help,and they told him to type up his resume on
a computer and distribute it--it's like, wellthat wasn't very helpful because he didn't
know how to use a computer and he wasn't goingto type up his damn resume.
It was, "if you want to get a job, go outand do the things that it would take to get
a job."
Well yeah, if you can do that then you don'thave a problem.
And so the government agencies were completelyuseless, and they were staffed by people who
would assume that if you didn't do what youwere advised to, then you just didn't want
to have a job.
Instead of ever thinking that maybe you couldn'tdo it.
It's not the easy to use a computer.
And then I tried to get him a volunteer job--wellyou can bloody well forget about that because
it's harder to get a volunteer job than itis to get a real job.
And the reason for that is that you have tostep through a number of complex bureaucratic
hoops, including having a police check.
And you know, first of all that's intimidatingas hell for people, even if they haven't done
anything wrong.
And second, it's not that straightforward.
It involves manoeuvring through a complicatedbureaucracy, and that's not the only step.
There's all sorts of other steps.
So volunteer work, that's out man.
That's just not going to happen, not generallyspeaking.
And then I found him a job helping a guy outwho had a bicycle shop/book store--kind of
a strange combination--but it was a governmentsubsidized temporary position.
And then, he did a good job at it--he wasreshelving books and that sort of thing--and
so he was reliable.
He could do that.
But, you know, the subsidy program ended andof course, if you run a bike shop/book store
it's not like you have additional money tohire someone because, that's a store that's
just not going to be generating maybe anyincome, but certainly not enough to hire someone.
So that fell apart.
Then I made a bunch of personal contacts withcharity organizations to see if I could get
him a volunteer position.
I finally got him a volunteer position.
And then I went with him to train at the volunteerposition, and that was so enlightening.
So what he had to do was, he had a stack ofpieces of paper here and then a stack of envelopes
here, and in principle the pieces of paper--whichwere letters--were in the same order as the
envelopes were.
And so what he had to do was fold the piecesof paper three times and stuff the folded
piece of paper into the envelope and the sealthe envelope and then put it here.
But it was a bit more complicated than thatbecause sometimes the letters were in French
and sometimes they were in English, so whatthat meant was that he had to watch and see
that the French envelopes went into this stackand the English envelopes went into that stack.
So that's one degree of complexity, right.
But then it also turned out that those damnedenvelopes had to be run through an automatic
letter sorting machine.
Now you might think, well that doesn't matter,but it does matter because those things have
very tightly defined tolerances.
And if you make a mistake--imagine you folda piece of paper and the first time you fold
it you made a mistake of an eighth of an inch.
And then the next time you fold it you makeanother eighth of an inch mistake.
That means your piece of paper is now onequarter inch out of truth.
And then you stuff it in the envelope andfold it, but then you crinkle the envelope.
And so then the envelope gets stuck in theautomatic processing machine.
So I taught him probably 20 hours, how tofold this piece of paper into three.
You know, and he was a bit shaky, and he justdidn't have the fine motor ability or the
cognitive ability to do that.
And then--I'll end with this--when he finallycouldn't do it anymore, what happened was
the letters came with photographs attachedto them.
And then he had to fold the pieces of paperaround the photographs in a way that didn't
crumple the photographs so that they couldstill fit into the envelopes.
And each photo was stapled, maybe half aninch different, per piece of paper.
So then he had to fold them properly witha different folding technique for every piece
of paper, and he had to sort them into Frenchand English, and then also if the envelopes
and the papers ever got out of sync--whichthey did now and then--he had to figure out
how to sort the envelopes and the pieces ofpaper to make sure that they were matched
with the proper envelope.
It was like, no.
That was the end of it.
And so I'll tell you the rest of this storylater.
So anyways, the moral of the story is if you'resmart, you're privileged and, thank god, make
use of it.
And if you're on the low end of the IQ distribution,man, you've got one tough life ahead of you.
It has nothing to do with willingness to work,or virtually nothing.
And it's a good thing to know, even thoughit's horrible.