This reading, and the next, are probably the most explicitly philosophical
 of the course.
 Then we move on to psychometrics and biological psychology.
 Those will be the most scientific lectures of the course.
 As I prepared for this talk this morning, I thought about why I have these topics
 approached in this way.
 Probably part of the answer is that it is not clear or studying personality
 (at least insofar as the aim is to promote the development of the personality,
 which is associated with the desire for mental health, "subjective well-being,"
 a term I do not like, or "meaning"), it is not clear whether this could be a strictly scientific endeavor.
 If it cannot be a strictly scientific endeavor, how are we to understand it?

 The problem with reading one study after another is that you only see a small part of the domain at a time.

 Often times it is difficult to understand because, in order to understand the results of a study, you
 you need the underlying knowledge, which is necessary to place the research in a kind of framework.

 That framework is developed by studying the relevant scientific
 and psychological literature.
 Then that framework must be expanded to include the relevant philosophical assumptions.
 I don't think you can understand the details without understanding the assumptions.
 I think you have to learn by heart if you don't understand the fundamental elements.
 Memorization has very little to do with knowledge.
 You may be able to remember transactions on the basis of which you can do something,
 such as repairing a car or playing a piano piece.
 It's not that such things are not worthwhile.
 But in order for these ideas to take root so that they have effect and meaning, you have to understand them
 at the right level of analysis.
 One of the things I really appreciate about personality theory, especially the clinical aspect of it
 (though not just the clinical aspect), that's the people who got involved
 related to clinical practice and clinical theories written in the twentieth century
 with the most fundamental problems that affect people.
 I started my academic career with political science, to that extent
 you can be called a scientist as an "undergraduate."
 In my third year I had lost all interest in it because I discovered it, at least during that period
 (I don't know if it has changed), the political scientists already
 decided that people are primarily motivated by economic interests.
 I didn't find that useful at all, because I wanted to know why they would be motivated by economic interests.

 In a way, it's easy to understand people when you've already decided what they value.
 But if you can't explain what they value, or what they should value ...
 that's a completely different matter, and that's psychology.
 It's a profound question, because it's not clear at all whether the question:
 "Are there things you should appreciate?" a reasonable question is whether a reasonable answer is possible.
 What I can tell you about that based on my own experience ...
 I don't mean my personal experience, but my experience as a clinical psychologist is
 people without a goal have a big problem.
 I don't know why that is.
 And I don't know what that means for what your goal should be, but I've seen

 that if, for example, you had to make a choice (which you will all be doing in the next five years)
 between pursuing something patiently and thus building a clear identity,
 or not making a choice and wandering around ...
 I can tell you that if you go astray, by the time you are thirty, you will be a pitiful person.

 I'm not exactly sure why that is, and I'm not sure
 or that means choosing something and working with dedication, a form of apprenticeship,
 better than wandering.
 It depends on what you mean by "better."
 What I can say is that not shaping an identity seems to be a mistake,
 and an unrecoverable mistake by the time you are forty.
 At that point it is very difficult to overcome that.
 Because you are not young anymore.
 If you try to form an identity at that age, which is sometimes possible,
 you have to compete with all those young, sparkling people, who have more potential than you,
 in the eyes of, for example, an employer.
 It seems hopeless.
 Anyway, today go further into the depth of philosophical assumptions, more than
 that we have done in the past.
 I want to acquaint you with the great philosophical and psychological
 movements from the twentieth century, because they shape us and the world we live in
 in countless ways.
 If you don't understand them, you don't really understand where you are.
 You don't know where you are in history and what ideas drive you.

 I think I told you when we studied Jung that Jung said, “People don't have ideas,
 ideas people own, ”and I think that's right.
 One of Jung's, in a sense, lasting contributions is that you need to know what ideas
 control you, because otherwise you cannot know what they are doing to you.
 When you think about all the irrational and seemingly dysfunctional things people do
 As an individual and as a group, you have to ask yourself if you want to get caught up in something like this.

 Whether you could be free from it, or if you are trapped in it, where exactly you are
 going.
 According to Jung, you should also think about that if it were so
 where you go is not where you would go if you made a fully informed conscious choice.

 I think what we're going to cover in the next two lectures is the most important material
 includes with regard to how people can be possessed by ideas.
 Existentialism, which is philosophically closely related to phenomenology,
 emerged as a psychological movement after World War II. There are a number of reasons for this.
 One reason was that it was pretty clear, not just that World War II was an ideological struggle
 between fascism and western democracy,
 which was immediately replaced by another ideological struggle,
 the one between communism and liberalism ...
 The question of ideological possession and the relationship between the individual,
 that is ideologically possessed, and its responsibility, and the actions of the state, became important issues
 in the 1950s, and with good reason.
 One of the lasting questions after World War II, which still has not been conclusively answered, is:

 "When the masses go insane, to what extent are the individuals making up the group?"
 You can avoid that question regarding what happened in Nazi Germany,
 by assuming that it was coercion from above, affecting a large proportion of normal German citizens
 turned into a Nazi majority.
 I don't think there is any evidence that such ideas are correct.
 There is research showing how willingly people adapt to authorities.
 You know the famous experiment ...
 For example, the Stanford prison experiment, where "undergraduates" were randomly divided into guards and inmates,
 simulating a prison, of course turning the guards into sadistic psychopaths,

 some at least.
 The prisoners turned into sad victims at a glance.
 An aspect is clearly demonstrated, that people react strongly to guidelines from the environment,
 and that it can quickly get out of hand.
 But that doesn't mean you tend to conform to authority
 whether the human tendency to adapt to authority can explain the rise
 of mass movements such as Nazism or Communism, because the explanation does not really clarify.
 Okay, some of the people in the crowd were just followers.
 What about the leaders?
 Maybe it was all followers except Hitler, so it's Hitler's fault, it's all his fault.

 You almost turn him into a god of some kind that way.
 Yes, a bad god, but still… if he sets everything in motion, you can't separate him from the idea
 from Lucifer.
 At that point he has become an archetypal figure of evil.
 The same goes for Stalin and Mao.
 Those were very bad people.
 There is no doubt about that.
 But to locate all evil in them, and see all others as docile victims,
 is a useful idea, but it doesn't help.
 That only makes the followers pathetic in another way.
 They are not themselves actively involved in cruelty for their own ends, beyond their adaptation,
 but they are just as sad and bad as they would be if they did it of their own will.

 I don't see the difference between a bully and a bully's henchman.
 Actually, I think the bully has more courage than the henchmen.
 A strange kind of courage.
 This is what the existentialists were concerned about.
 The motivation behind their concern was Nietzsche.
 You know I'm concentrating on Nietzsche and Dostoevsky,
 because I think those two people summed up the nineteenth century.
 I really think so.
 The problems they revealed and predicted would unfold in the twentieth century
 were the problems that unfolded in the twentieth century.
 Their predictions were correct, and I think their explanation for it was correct.
 Since sociologists, including psychologists, are incapable
 to predict great events ... the fact that these two people did, thirty to forty years before the events happened,
 and even longer, seems to indicate to me that it is worth it
 to regard them as psychologists.
 Nietzsche certainly saw himself that way.
 And Dostoevsky too, by the way, and they have had a very big impact on people like
 Freud, Jung, Rogers, all the people we've studied.
 Their thoughts lie beneath all of the issues we've discussed.
 This is one of Nietzsche's great statements:
 “One must be silent about what is great, or speak in a grand way.
 In a grand way, cynical and uninhibited.
 What I am telling you is the history of the next two centuries.
 I describe what is to come, what can no longer come differently, the arrival of nihilism.
 Our entire European culture has been moving for some time, with agonizing tension
 growing every decade, towards catastrophe, restless, violent, headlong,
 like a river that wants to reach the end, that no longer reflects.
 Who is afraid to reflect.
 He who speaks now, on the other hand, has hitherto done nothing but reflect as an instinctive philosopher
 and hermit, who gained his lead by standing aside, outside it.
 Why has the advent of nihilism become necessary?
 Because that is how the values ​​we have held up to now reach their final consequence.
 Because nihilism is the ultimate logical extension of our great values ​​and ideals.
 Because we have to experience nihilism before we can discover what value these values ​​really had. ”

 One of Nietzsche's theses was that Christianity in Europe had been transformed
 to science, and one of the advantages of the centuries-long Catholic rule of Europe
 that the spirit of the Catholics who took the discipline seriously,
 or took the dogma seriously, had learned to interpret all events
 within the framework of one theory.
 He saw that as a form of discipline.
 Imagine that I want to teach you how to develop a theory, then I teach you a theory and you adopt it.

 Nietzsche's point is: that means you know a theory, but it also means something else.

 It also means that you now know how to develop a theory and the important consequences of learning a theory
 may not be the theory itself.
 But that you learn how to develop a theory.
 Nietzsche also pointed out that once you can develop a theory, you can distance yourself
 of the theory from which you learned that.
 And so you can develop a theory about your previous theory,
 and that was what he believed happened to Europe as a result of the domination of Christianity,
 especially because of Christianity's emphasis on the usefulness of the truth.
 He thought that after Catholicism had turned to scientific research,
 but that the spirit of developing truthful theories remained the same.
 As a result, European thinking was disciplined by dogma.
 Then it freed itself from dogma, it turned its power to dogma,
 and found that the dogma didn't seem to be rooted in anything you could get a grip on.
 Like you get to grips with things with an empirical mind.
 And so it fell apart.
 That says little more than that science is a fatal challenge to religion,
 but it says it in a more profound and interesting way.
 It also explains why he makes the claim that nihilism is the logical end
 of the great values ​​and ideals.
 He did not see nihilism as a counter-movement against dogmatic Christianity.
 He saw it as the logical outcome.
 Is that relevant?
 Why is it relevant?
 I think there are several reasons why it is relevant.
 The first observation may be that many mental illnesses, this is an existentialist claim,
 stems from nihilism.
 When someone who is depressed comes to visit you, you often hear: "I experience life as meaningless."

 But that's not what they mean.
 What they mean is that they see the meaning of life as suffering, which is also a meaning, isn't it?
 And that is not bearable.
 Then the question becomes, "Why bother?"
 That is the basic question of suicide.
 It's a philosophical question.
 I think it was Camus who said that was the only real philosophical question
 whether to commit suicide or not.
 That's a bit dark, maybe Camus could use some antidepressants,
 but you get his point.
 And I think it is inappropriate to discuss depression with someone who is depressed,
 especially if he is intelligent and open, and therefore more inclined to
 philosophical thinking, without raising this issue.
 Why live when there is suffering?
 Well, that's one problem. If you find it difficult to get into your life
 to build something solid, a solid ground under your feet on which you can stand and in which you can believe, on which you can trust,
 will you wander.
 The reason is that many of the things you will have to do will be difficult,
 and will involve suffering, which is also an existentialist thesis.
 The existentialists do not claim the same as Freud.
 Freud states that a normal person is in a sense sane,
 aside from the minor inconveniences of everyday life, and that you have to be psychopathological,
 must have been hurt,
 maybe several times, and there are other things that could contribute to that.
 But the existentialist would say, “No, wait a minute.
 Perhaps the basic situation of people is nihilism and suffering,
 and something has to be built up to counteract that, so that life becomes bearable. ”
 That seems to me to be a very reasonable proposition.
 It is a strange statement because I have seen people in my life who have been tormented
 by existentialist ideas, which were chased by it.
 Ideas related to the meaning of life, concerns about death,
 and the decay of everything that seems to have value.
 It is an essential issue for them.
 And I've seen other people who never seem to raise those questions.
 I think those people are conservative people, not very open
 and probably not very neurotic.
 They are not philosophically curious.
 They don't think very abstractly.
 Or if they do, they don't necessarily get troubled in the deepest parts
 of who they are by the questions.
 But there are plenty of people in that other category.
 Nihilism and atheism are closely related.
 They are certainly not identical.
 Although I think it is difficult for atheism to describe why it is not essentially nihilistic.
 That is Dostoevsky's great criticism.
 Dostoevsky argued that if one does not assume a fundamental value, there is no reason
 why you can't do everything you want.
 And that's his famous phrase:
 "If there is no God, everything is allowed."
 All of Dostoevsky's novels are an exploration of that idea.
 Sometimes it is an exploration of what that idea would mean if it were lived
 in the life of a given individual, as in "Guilt and Penance."
 Another example is his book "Demons."
 It is an examination of what that idea would mean if embraced by an individual who is social
 and has political ambitions.
 In it, Dostoevsky actually predicted that one of the consequences of
 the death of God would consist in the rise of communist totalitarianism,
 that was what he provided for Demons.
 It's a pretty accurate prediction.
 I was amazed when I found out.
 Nietzsche predicted the same, by the way.
 For those two men, death meant an ultimate system of meaning, especially like ... look ...
 if you think of something like European Christianity it is in a sense misleading,
 for the belief system that was the foundation of European Christianity and other great belief systems,
 was not two thousand years old.
 It was twenty-five thousand years old.
 You may think of it as starting in year zero, but that is incorrect from a historical perspective.

 The ideas upon which profound religious traditions are based are generally anchored
 in ideas much older than those traditions.
 When things started to fall apart for us in the late 1800s,
 and we could no longer rely on our historical morals to guide us ...
 We didn't kind of lose some superficial layer then, some psychological upper layer
 that had been laid over mankind for two thousand years.
 It was much deeper than that.
 We don't know how old those ideas are.
 We have some idea.
 They are at least as old as the written culture.
 But we also know peoples who have ended up in general history,
 due to globalization, which had no writing, but mythologies with the same themes.

 Some of those nations, as far as we can tell, had a way of life
 which has not changed materially over the past twenty-five thousand years.
 The Australian Aborigines, for example.
 There is plenty of evidence that those ideas are extraordinarily old.
 That means if we distance ourselves from it, we don't just distance ourselves
 from our philosophical assumptions, but that we also separate ourselves from the historical consequences of our biology.

 That is a serious problem.
 I think that's partly why it's hard to differentiate between someone who is nihilistic
 and someone who is mentally ill.
 That is not a radical claim.
 People, especially those on the depressive end of the spectrum, will tell you they are nihilistic.

 Maybe they don't use that terminology, although they often do.
 “I don't see the point,” but why does that matter?
 The fact seems to be that it matters.
 That's an interesting fact, it's a phenomenological fact in a sense,
 because one of the things Heidegger pointed out (he was a founder of the phenomenological school)
 was that our primary orientation in the world, he thinks in a peculiar way,
 is one of concern.
 You could say, "What characterizes your experience?"
 What kind of creature are you?
 Heidegger would reply, "You are a being that cares about things, insofar
 you are involved in the world, your primary orientation is one of concern. "
 You can see that as a value.
 It is the result of an orientation on values.
 Who knows where that comes from.
 It is partly biological, partly learned, and partly historical.
 It's very complex.
 But if you don't care about anything anymore, you're in trouble.
 That is one of the things that seems to indicate that caring for something is in fact a fundamental reality.
 When you stop caring, you don't stop suffering.
 It seems that unless the care balances the suffering, you cannot maintain balance.

 In part it has to do with the fact that it does not seem fair.
 When people go through terrible things, they always say two things.
 "How can the world be like this?"
 "What is going on at the most basic level of existence that causes such suffering?"

 You will certainly ask if you have a child who is diagnosed with cancer, for example.
 Or you may think, Why is this horror, it seems, necessarily directed at me right now,
 if hypothetically it could not have happened, or maybe someone
 could have happened that deserves more? ”
 The good get punished and the bad go unpunished, something like that.

 In humans, this leads to a cry for justice.
 How can the world be like this?
 That seems built into us, as it were.
 They are not questions that we can simply avoid.
 They are questions that will arise in your mind.
 They will arise as basic questions when enough terrible things have happened to you.
 The existentialists would say, “Those are the conditions of existence that you have to live with.

 It's part of human nature. ”
 It is part of being human to be upset by such questions.
 Then the question becomes, at least in part, "Is there a way to answer them?"
 Nietzsche said, “We need new values ​​at some point.
 Nihilism is imminent.
 Where does this quirkiest guy come from?
 Starting point ...
 It is a mistake to think of social distress or physiological deterioration or depravity
 all things, the cause of nihilism. ”
 That is a typical Nietzschean sentence because it contains three profound ideas.
 Each in a different part.
 Nietzsche said, "I can write in one sentence, what others write in an entire book."
 Then he said, "What others can't even write in a whole book."
 This sentence is a good example of this.
 What is he saying? When you see that people are suffering and in trouble, you can say
 that the cause of that is the injustice of the economic system, and that
 they are in the bottom layer and suffer from it.
 But Nietzsche does not allow that as a necessary interpretation, because
 according to him there are several ways to interpret your position.
 Only the absence of material luxury does not force you to use a certain perspective.
 Physiological decline.
 People are unhappy or suffer because of being sick in one way or another.
 You could make that a matter of definition by saying that if you are suffering or unhappy, you are sick.

 But that is not a causal relationship.
 That's just another way of categorizing the data.
 Nietzsche would reject that… there is a correlation between them
 physiological health and meaning in life.
 But the correlation does not imply causation.
 Even if it were, the relationship is nowhere near as perfect
 if you would like before you would accept it as relevant.
 The depravity of all things is the idea that existence as such is bad,
 as an evil trick, as Tolstoy said in his "My Confession."
 Tolstoy was the most famous novelist in the world during his intellectual heyday,
 and was appreciated everywhere, especially in Russia.

 He was a socially motivated man, known for his wisdom.
 For years he was afraid to go out with a rope or a gun,
 because he was afraid he would hang or shoot himself.
 The reason was that he was so moved by the idea that life is so unbearable
 that it should be eradicated.
 He couldn't think of anything else.
 It was a way of thinking that was very characteristic of intellectuals in Russia
 of that moment and that place.
 Dostoevsky wrote about exactly the same things.
 Even Tolstoy noted that only the observation that the world was corrupt and bad,
 was not always enough to drive people to nihilism, since there were people
 that were not nihilistic, despite the fact that it seemed natural to him.
 Tolstoy took refuge in the Russian people, he was preoccupied with
 the idea of ​​the people and the wisdom of the people, and he saw the Russian people, like the farm workers, as a source of inspiration.

 Tolstoy fought for the freedom of the farm workers and saw their simple faith
 as something admirable rather than as something pathetic and weak
 is from an intellectual perspective.
 He tried to imitate that belief without criticism.
 But of course he couldn't, because there is no turning back.

 Nietzsche says: “Suffering, be it psychological, physical or intellectual, is not necessary at all
 bring forth nihilism.
 That is, the radical rejection of value, meaning and desirability.
 Such suffering always allows for different interpretations.
 It is one specific interpretation, the Christian moral, in which nihilism is grounded.

 The end of Christianity, through its own morality, which cannot be replaced.
 Who turns against the Christian god.
 The truthfulness developed by Christianity is sick with falsehood
 and mendacity of all Christian interpretations of the world and history.
 It is a ricochet from 'God is the truth' to an equally radical belief:
 "Everything is illusion."
 A form of Buddhism.
 Skepticism about morality is paramount.
 The end of the moral interpretation of the world, which has no confirmation anymore,
 after trying to escape to another world, it leads to nihilism.
 Everything lacks meaning. ”
 This is rooted in Nietzsche's criticism of Christianity, as he believed it to be Christianity
 morally was exceedingly inadequate, as it offered its followers nothing but
 the possibility of deliverance from their suffering after death.
 It was projected in a different world.
 As far as Nietzsche was concerned, people were thus relieved of their responsibility for the things here and now
 to improve,
 and Jung's comment was that the early scientists saw
 that Christianity's promise of spiritual salvation was no longer sufficient,
 thereby motivating the development of science.
 For early Christianity ... this is part of the tension between Christianity and science.
 The early Christians felt that the earth was somehow very corrupt.
 And the only thing you could hope for during your earthly life was suffering, and you had to accept that
 in the hope of redemption in the future, after your death.
 Of course, that philosophy turned out not to be enough for the people.
 Jung's hypothesis about the development of science was that an opposite fantasy developed
 in the unconscious of the Europeans,
 in which the material world, which was perceived as evil (and therefore was not worthy of studying or achieving anything in it),
 contained the potential for redemption that had not been forthcoming.
 Such was Jung's commentary on the idea of ​​the philosopher's stone because the alchemists
 who were “proto-scientists”, trying to find a material substance,
 the philosopher's stone, which would give its owners welfare, health, and eternal life.
 Why are we doing science?
 Hopefully because we think we will benefit from it here and now, physically.
 Jung saw science as coming from that compensatory dream, a brilliant idea.
 It's actually the only idea I've ever read that provides a psychological explanation
 for the emergence of the scientific discipline.
 It is a very strange activity.
 You have to limit your field of interest enormously to be a scientist.
 You need to focus on a number of phenomena, which to consider may seem equally useless
 as the question of how many angels can dance on a pinhead.
 You have to be committed to studying it for decades to make very limited progress.
 How could people ever be motivated to do that?
 Jung's interpretation was that there was a deep counter-movement, against the over-spiritualization of the psyche,
 and that was the new appreciation for matter and its possibilities.
 Nietzsche believed the state of Christianity at the end of the nineteenth century
 which was of an untenable philosophy because he thought he had given up his moral obligations
 by escaping to another world, damning life as people actually live it.
 He saw this decline as a good thing.
 He also points out elsewhere.
 The difference between having a theory and learning to develop theories.
 He says look, if you grew up in a tradition, any tradition,
 do you have a belief system, any system, and it's falling apart,
 for whatever point,
 then you suffer for two reasons.
 The first is that your belief system fell apart and that's not right.
 Everything then remains undefined and open, and in a sense you drown in the possibilities.
 That how Kierkegaard would put it.
 But the second consequence is even worse.
 Once you have learned that a belief system that is solid can be torn down and fall apart,
 then it is very difficult to ever have faith in any system.
 Not only do you become a doubter when it comes to your credo, you become a "meta-doubter,"
 someone who doubts all belief systems.
 The step from there to nihilism… maybe those two are the same.
 You can see that as the disease of the critical rational mind.
 He can saw off every branch on which he sits himself.
 And its usefulness ...
 you examine everything.
 You have to question things.
 The use of that is that you learn new things.
 But the price you pay for it is that you can never really be certain about anything.
 You could say, "Maybe you don't need to be sure," but you can forget that.
 You know that during your life you often have to act as if you have certainty.
 If you choose a steady partner for example, if you do, which is likely,
 since you are university educated, and highly educated people still do.
 Although no one else is doing it yet.
 And you're gonna choose a career, and you're gonna make decisions, one after the other,
 about things about which you cannot make a choice without certainty.
 But then you have no life.
 Then you are a whirlwind of chaos, so you are stuck with necessity
 to follow a plan, you act as if you have certainty, which your intellect considers inappropriate.
 And that is difficult for people.
 Why should I choose this instead of that?
 Why would I do this instead of that?
 "I don't know" is not very useful as an answer for beings with cognitive abilities like ours.

 This is truly brilliant.
 I find it hard to believe it was written so long ago.
 This is Dostoevsky's critique of communism 40 years before communism was a political force.

 Dostoevsky thinks very intensively about this problem of nihilism.
 By the way, Nietzsche read a lot of Dostoevsky.

 He thinks, "There seem to be two possibilities."
 One option is this superhuman nihilism, a variant of what Nietzsche proposed,
 because he argued that it was the responsibility
 would become of every man to, after the death of his religious tradition,
 determine its own values.
 He didn't think people could do that.
 He thought it needed a new kind of person who could handle that,
 because he is actually asking you for a coherent and practically applicable philosophical structure
 to develop, out of nothing, over a lifetime.
 Good luck with that.
 In addition, he assumed that people create values, or could.
 That's true to an extent.
 We will talk about this when we deal with the phenomenological perspective.
 But it cannot be taken for granted.
 One of the things you might notice is that you can't force yourself to love someone, can you?

 You can't just decide to appreciate someone and "poof" it happens.
 You may want to appreciate with all your heart, or at least your head, someone,
 because he deserves it.
 He never treated you badly.
 You may have said you will be loyal to him, and "poof" someone comes over and you feel
 enormously attracted to him, and there you go, like someone possessed.
 Did you create that value yourself?
 And closer to your experience, you can make yourself interested in something
 what do you find boring?
 Good luck.
 You would rather clean under your bed than read a piece you don't want to read.
 You cannot say to yourself, "I have to read this piece for the following reasons"
 and "poof" it's interesting.
 No, your value systems, whatever they are, function independently.
 That's largely because they're possessed by ideas you don't know about,

 with historical roots, and in a sense playing you as if you were a puppet
 and that's no joke.
 Okay, this is what Dostoevsky said in the late 1800s.
 That was in a book called "Notes from the Underground," which is about a man like Hamlet.
 He is a modern man.
 He's actually a twentieth century man, and his problem is that he's very intelligent and doesn't know
 what he should do with his life.
 It bothers him,
 and worse, not only does it bother him not to get his life in order,
 and cannot deal with any kind of coherent personality,
 but he knows he can't.
 And at the same time he torments himself because of that weakness.
 He is very neurotic.
 But he is an educated and intelligent neurote.
 He's gone through all the reasoning you can think of,
 to somehow talk himself out of his neuroses and distress.
 He has nothing but contempt for his own character.
 He thinks he is much weaker than people who can just act without thinking.
 He's in a hole, a dark hole.
 It's great to read.
 It is darkly humorous and a good philosophical and psychological study.
 In one part of this book, Dostoevsky's protagonist starts talking about it
 alternatives to his nihilistic despair, and he begins to think about utopianism as a possible alternative.

 What is Utopianism?
 Medieval Christianity promised salvation after death.
 A utopia does the same, but promises it in the here and now.
 Communism was a specific form of utopianism, and fascism also had such an element.
 Although, I don't know how to say it, it was less intellectually sophisticated than communism.

 Communists said something like, “If you stop being selfish, and share,
 can we turn the world into a place where everyone will have enough,
 and everyone will be able to do what they want.
 And because of the natural goodness of people, if selfishness can be overcome,
 that are an almost paradise situation. ”
 It was a powerful idea.
 Eighty years of our history has fought to determine the value and validity of that idea.
 Hundreds of millions of people died as a result.
 And you can understand why it was so attractive.
 Utopian ideologies are still tempting to people, and radical Islam is difficult
 to be interpreted differently than as another utopian ideology.
 The idea is that once you implement strict Sharia law, "poof,"
 you suddenly have the kingdom of God on earth.
 In part the radical Muslims are fighting the West,
 because they see it as a counter-movement against Western nihilism.
 Because they don't want to end up there.
 We would say it is progress.
 Yes, it is progress, by our standards, and it comes at a cost.
 And we don't understand how we paid that price.
 The reason I'm telling you this is because you shouldn't think that
 these kinds of issues have disappeared, or they are irrelevant.
 They are relevant.
 The man who advises Putin ...
 His name is Alexander Dugin and he is no admirer of Western liberalism.
 He sees it as fundamentally nihilistic.
 He thinks its universal application would result in the loss of all local cultures
 and would produce a kind of materialistic “hyper individuality”.
 He admires tradition.
 And in particular the Russian Orthodox tradition.
 And he believes that the cultures of India, Russia and China in particular,
 develop their own local cultures, shut out the West, and form a counter-movement
 against nihilistic liberalism.
 You can find what you want from it.
 I think Doegin's biggest problem is ... he doesn't want the various ideas
 that characterize the West collide with Russia and disintegrate it.
 But he doesn't understand that those ideas will come up in Russia anyway,
 if you want to keep them outside, you will have to remove them inside too,
 and the Soviets had been trying to do that for seventy years with dire consequences.
 I don't think he can escape the problem by building walls,
 although he's going to try.
 And that's what Putin is doing.
 So these ideas have not disappeared at all.
 They lie behind all the great conflicts that characterize the modern era.
 Dostoevsky criticized utopianism and it's brilliant, its wording, so I'm going to read it to you.

 “In short, one can say everything about the history of the world.
 Anything that enters perhaps the most distorted imagination.
 The only thing that cannot be said is that it is rational.
 The word gets stuck in your throat, and indeed this is the strange thing that happens all the time.

 They ceaselessly appear in life, moral and rational people, sages and lovers of
 humanity, who make it their goal to live their entire lives as morally and rationally as possible.

 To be like a light to their neighbors, simply to show them
 that it is possible to live morally and rationally in this world.
 But we all know that sooner or later these people are being dishonest to themselves
 and strangely trying to cheat, and often very underhand.
 Now I ask, what can be expected of man, since he is a being with such strange qualities?

 Shower him with every worldly blessing.
 Drown him in a sea of ​​happiness, so that nothing but bubbles of bliss are seen on the surface.
 Give him economic prosperity so that he has nothing to do but sleep,
 eat cakes and engage in the continuation of the species.
 And even then, out of nothing but ingratitude, just out of hatred, he would do you a dirty trick.
 He would even risk his cupcakes, deliberately wishing for the most fatal nonsense, the most uneconomic absurdity,
 simply to introduce into all this positive common sense, its fatal idiosyncrasy.
 It is his frenzied dreams, his vulgar madness, that he will want to keep,
 to prove himself as if it were necessary
 that people are still people, and not the keys of a piano, who threaten to completely control the laws of nature,
 so complete that he only desires according to the calendar. ”

 Clearly this is Dostoevsky's critique of materialistic determinism,
 that he saw as a spiritual threat, the vision in which animals and humans are but determined machines.

 It is a Newtonian view of the world and therefore everything could be calculated and planned,
 because it could be predicted and measured. "And that's not all.
 Even if man were really nothing more than a piano key, even if it were proven by
 science and mathematics, even then it would not become reasonable, but rather purposeful
 doing something perverse out of ingratitude just to make his point.
 And if he does not find means, he will bring about destruction and chaos, suffering of all kinds,
 just to prove himself.
 He will unleash a curse on the world, as only man can curse, that is his privilege,
 and the primary difference between him and other animals, and perhaps he will be through his curse
 achieve his goal and convince himself that he is human and not a piano key.
 If you say that all this can also be calculated and schematized, chaos and darkness and curses,
 so that by the possibility of calculating everything would be stopped in advance,
 and reason were to arise again, man would purposely go mad to get rid of reason and make his point.

 I believe in that, I vouch for it.
 Because everything man does seems to be nothing but himself every minute
 to prove that he is human and not a piano key.
 It may be at the expense of his life.
 Maybe through cannibalism.
 And if so, can it help it to be tempted by the joy that it hasn't gotten that far yet,
 and that desire still rests on something we don't know about?
 You would yell at me if you were to lower yourself to that
 that no one touches my free will, that all it matters is that my will, of itself,
 of free will, should coincide with my own normal interests,
 with the laws of physics and arithmetic.
 Good heavens gentlemen, what free will is left when it comes to schedules and calculations?

 If it's nothing more than two times two, four.
 Twice two is four without my will.
 As if free will would mean that. ”
 What's his point?
 It's like the garden of Eden.
 How are people composed?
 Imagine that you can recreate paradise on Earth.

 In theory, that's what everyone wants.
 We can live in paradise and the problem would be solved.
 We would all live happily ever after.
 But in the original paradise story, the people had.
 And the first thing they did when they got there is just that
 what was forbidden to them, which would make everything go wrong.
 That was what they did immediately.
 And Dostoevsky's stories tell that story in a new way.
 The idea was that people are not like the utopians think.
 We don't want it easy.
 We don't want to be comfortable.
 We don't want it to be good.
 Because we would be bored to death.
 So if someone ever put us in that kind of daycare, in which we
 would never have to bother for anything, even if it meant that we were insane
 we would destroy it.
 And he goes even further, he says, "That's a good thing."
 Kierkegaard who wrote earlier, about 40 years earlier, said something similar.
 “It's been about four years since I got the idea to see if I could become a writer,
 I remember it well, it was on a Sunday.
 Yes, a Sunday afternoon.
 I sat out, as usual, in the café in the garden of Frederiksberg.
 I was a student for about ten years then.
 Although I was never lazy, what I did nevertheless seemed like a sparkling doing nothing,
 an occupation for which I still have great weaknesses, and in which I may even excel somewhat.

 I read a lot, spent the rest of the day lounging and pondering, or pondering and lounging,
 but that was all.
 So I sat there and smoked my cigar, when I was lost in thought.
 I remember these from several thoughts.
 You're starting to be an old man, I said to myself, without being anything
 and without actually doing anything.
 On the other hand, if you look around literature and life, you see
 the celebrated names and figures, the esteemed and acclaimed men,
 who acquire a place and are much discussed.
 The benefactors of our time, who know how to help humanity by making life ever easier.

 Some by railways, others by horse-drawn wagons and steamers, others by telegraph,
 others with understandable compendia and small lists of all kinds of information.
 Finally, the true benefactors of this time make the spiritual life ever easier, for the benefit of the mind,
 and at the same time more meaningful.
 And what do you do?
 Then my monologue was interrupted, because my cigar was finished and a new one had to be lit.
 So I smoked again, and suddenly the following thought came to mind.
 You have to do something, but with your limited capabilities it will be impossible to
 something even easier than it already is.
 You have to try to make something more difficult with the same humanitarian enthusiasm as the others.

 I was very pleased with that idea, and at the same time I was flattered by the thought that I,
 like those others, would be loved and esteemed by the whole community.
 Because if all people work together in every possible way to make everything easier, what remains
 just one possible danger.
 Namely, that the convenience becomes so great that at a given moment it becomes too great.
 Then only one loss remains, although it is not yet felt as loss.
 People will lack difficulties ...
 Out of humanity and despair at my embarrassing situation,
 because I saw that I had achieved nothing,
 and was unable to make anything easier than it already was, and moved by a genuine interest
 in those who make everything easy, I imagined it would be my job to create difficulties everywhere. ”

 One of the things you might be wondering is ... sometimes you come to college and have people
 talking about happiness.
 For example, they talk about positive psychology.
 I'm not a fan of positive psychology, by the way.
 Because happiness is like extrovertedness without neuroses, and we already knew that fifteen years ago.

 So we didn't have to worry about that.
 Either way, one of the questions you can ask yourself is, "Why are you going to college?"
 Have you come to make yourself happier?
 Think about it.
 This is something to consider.
 We know that when you put animals in a relatively boring situation, such as rats,
 and gives them free access to cocaine, they start using the cocaine until they die from it.

 Rats in a normal environment do not, but bored rats that are somewhat isolated,
 love cocaine.
 They will ignore sex, they will ignore food.
 They still drink water, if I remember correctly.
 But otherwise cocaine is everything to them.
 And if you can implant an electrode in their minds, their brains, what people have done
 you can inject the electrode into the hypothalamus, in the part that is involved
 with the reward centers ...
 It is the source of the dopamine system, and you can set it up so that if
 the rat presses a button, it gets a jolt of happiness… the rat will then sit there
 and pushing that button in a rather hysterical way, like he's looking for something else.

 But he will certainly do it because it is a specific form of reward.
 Now the question is: would you allow yourself to be connected in such a way?
 You may think there are times in your life when you do that
 is a great idea, but I guess most of you wouldn't want to,
 for the same reasons that you are not supplying yourself with an unlimited amount of cocaine.

 Which is a very good stimulant for producing positive emotions.
 It provides powerful psychomotor stimulation, and it affects parts of your brain
 who are active when you do something that you find valuable and productive.
 So why not just use that all the time?
 That's the question Aldous Huxley asked in "Brave New Word."
 You have everything you want, take some means to make you calm and happy, "poof," perfect.
 Is that what you want?
 And if the answer is "No" then you can ask yourself, "What the hell do you want?"
 One of the things that have been thinking a lot lately, that is, the last ten years ...

 there are sculptures i have seen.
 I have looked at pictures of it on the internet.
 There are statues of Atlas, and Atlas is a god who carries the world on his shoulders.
 And that is his fate or his curse, to bear the world on his shoulders.
 And you might say, "Poor Atlas."
 Maybe he should just put the world down and have a beer or something.
 But you may also think, "What is that figure trying ... what is that idea trying to express?"
 because it is an old idea.
 It's a profound idea.
 A figure with the world on his shoulders has something divine.
 I could say that's why you go to college whether you know it or not.
 You are here to take the world on your shoulders because it is a deep enough pursuit
 that is worthwhile, through which all the suffering that will befall you can be considered
 if worth it.
 Because the value of what you do is so great ... because you might ask:
 is there anything I can do whose value is so great that is the fact,
 for the existentialists it is a fact that you are mortal and vulnerable
 and cannot escape suffering ...
 That you would not only find that acceptable, but would also like to.
 That you want to pay that price.
 You could say that is the existential question.
 And that question has a very interesting aspect.
 We will talk about this a lot in the next lesson.
 What happens if you make the opposite choice?
 I think the twentieth century basically showed us what happened when people got the
 made the opposite choice,
 for when people sacrifice their divine responsibility
 to the utopian claims of a totalitarian state, or to hopeless nihilism,
 is the consequence on the one hand, in the case of nihilism, despair and illness,
 and the consequence of totalitarianism, utopianism, was that you might not die, but you will
 being involved in it, making sure that many others will die.
 In a way, it depends on what kind of evidence you want, regarding
 what you should do.
 The conclusion I have drawn from all this, from reading the existentialists,
 is that if it is, the aimless suffering of humanity, and the impossibility of seeing the meaning of it,
 that makes you a nihilist and justifies that ...
 Then you make a claim right?
 The assertion, the implied statement, is that suffering is bad and should be stopped.
 Something in that trend.
 And maybe you do that by becoming suicidal, or maybe you do it by
 eventually become murderous, which is an option for more than just a few people.
 But I think there is a logical mistake in that, because
 the thesis you started with was that suffering is bad.

 That it should be reduced.
 Maybe it should even be canceled altogether.
 If you hide in nihilism, or maybe you hide in ideological totalitarianism,
 then we already know where that will end.
 As a result, everything that's already bad is going to get so much worse,
 that it is almost unimaginable.
 So even by the standards of the nihilist, who says that the suffering of existence should result
 in its destruction ...
 The consequences of that way of thinking, or of switching to the other side
 and adopting a defensive ideology is that things change from
 the common bad condition the world is in,
 in hell like the Soviet Gulag, the Russian concentration camps,
 or Mao's great experiment of the Cultural Revolution, which probably killed a hundred million people.
 Which more or less nobody ever talks about.
 One of the things an existentialist would say is, “What is the relationship between
 mental health and responsibility? ”
 That's a good question because it also has something to do with the definition of
 mental health and responsibility.
 Let's say you want a good life, whatever that means.
 It doesn't mean being happy.
 It cannot mean "being happy" because there will be times in your life,
 or times when you will have to act, when you are not happy.
 For example, if one of your parents dies, you will make a choice.
 You will not be happy.
 Hopefully not.
 Otherwise you will be caught in some Freudian nightmare.
 But let's assume that's not the case.
 You will not be happy.
 You will be in pain, and maybe even partially broken.
 What should you do at such a time?
 The answer is: you have to be helpful instead of creating unrest.
 In such situations that is a good goal.
 Your mother will, if it is your father,
 are upset too, and so are your brothers and sisters
 and everyone you care about.
 You may have to be strong enough by then to be good at something in that situation.

 Someone has to arrange the funeral.
 Someone has to arrange the will.
 Someone has to make sure that the family doesn't get into a terrible fight,
 which often happens after the death of a parent.
 And luck won't motivate you to do that.
 Or if you have a sick child, as a parent.
 Maybe it's a chronic illness.
 You will not be happy with that.
 You know it will be a burden that you have to carry constantly. It's one of those
 things that
 seem particularly unjust.
 So you are no longer happy ...
 And if happiness is the goal of life, then it is more or less over.

 And these terrible things I'm talking about ...
 You can be sure that you will experience a lot of it in your lifetime.

 It's a rare period, it's rare in everyone's life when there isn't one or more
 things like that are going on, chronically.
 If it's not you, with a horrible health problem, or some other horrible problem,
 then it is a parent, brother or sister, or a child.
 Because you are connected to other people and they are also vulnerable,
 that is the fate of the people.
 So when it comes to happiness ... that's what Solzhenitsyn said about happiness:
 "Luck is a philosophy that perishes with the first blow of a guard's bat."
 Yes, you can put it that way.
 Here's another… I still have time to read these two, I guess.
 This is also from Kierkegaard.
 Kierkegaard, incidentally, was the first thinker to identify what we are today
 would call tension, especially existential tension or fear.
 Which has to do with the condition in which you question the essence of existence,
 the usefulness of existence, and Kierkegaard was the first person to formalize it
 to something resembling a philosophy or psychology,
 and then he tried to figure out how to overcome it.
 Since it seemed based on facts, actual observation,
 the observation of the suffering.
 And this is akin to Dostoevsky's comments, although Kierkegaard's commentary was written decades earlier.

 Dostoevsky's criticism was that the problem of suffering cannot be solved by utopia
 design and then participate in it like a herd animal.
 That is not possible because you are not like that.
 Even if it were possible, you would not accept it, you would create problems because you are interested
 are in trouble.
 You probably find problems more interesting than being happy.
 You know people like that.
 That is a sign of a serious personality disorder.
 I have many clients who create problems
 in some dramatic way, much more interesting than being boring and stable.
 They take on suffering in any form, and they torment others,
 to the extent that they are capable of doing so, just to keep up with the grind and safety of
 escape the normal.
 You call such people dramatic, too dramatic.
 You can see it that way.
 And as far as I can estimate, they make a relatively conscious choice.
 Problems are more interesting than security.
 Kierkegaard says something similar.
 But in a way that is more constructive,
 regarding what you should do with all that insane energy,
 that cannot be framed by a utopia.
 It has to do with individual responsibility.
 “There is a vision of life that says that where the crowd is, there is also the truth.
 And in the truth itself, there is a need to have the crowd on its side. ”
 I was once part of a panel discussion.
 I think we were talking about “gender,” differences between men and women.
 And there are many people
 the social constructivists in particular, who think that all differences ...
 there is biological sex, and there is gender, and gender is a social construct,
 and all differences in gender are social constructs.
 And there are no biological differences in gender between the two sexes.
 There is hardly any evidence for that idea.
 In fact, if you look at the most scientific psychological evidence, the opposite is the case.
 And not only that, as you make societies more egalitarian, men and women become more different
 instead of more of the same.
 The reason is that if you take away the variations in the environment
 by making everything equal, only the genetic differences remain.
 Which makes them visible.
 The biggest gender differences in the world are those between men and women in Scandinavia.
 That is partly a difference in personality.
 Women have more negative feelings and are more accommodating, among other things,
 but in particular there are differences when it comes to interests.
 The main difference between men and women seems to be in what they are interested in.
 In general, women are more interested in people, and men are
 more interested in things.
 In Scandinavia, one in twenty of the nursing person is male,
 and one in twenty in engineering is female.
 From time to time the Scandinavian governments try to change that, so that there is
 more male nurses and female construction workers.
 And if they really do their best, they can change the proportions a bit, for a few years.
 But when they stop doing that, the ratio goes back to one in twenty.
 So I referred to some of those studies, and one of the people I was talking to said:
 "What should we do with that?"
 And I said, “I don't know what you mean.
 These are scientific data. ”
 He said, "Yes, but truth must be shaped by agreement."
 And I thought, "I wouldn't want to live in a world that you'd rule,"
 for truth is not simply determined by agreement.
 If you think so
 then you find yourself in the position that Kierkegaard describes,
 because as long as everyone believes something, it is appropriate that you believe it too,
 and that's the truth then.
 That's a pretty awful philosophy, and people get in huge trouble because of it,
 because no matter how many people think that there is no wall there, someone who runs with his head forward,
 can expect a nasty surprise.
 “There is a vision of life that says that where the crowd is, there is also the truth.
 And in the truth itself, there is the need to
 to have the crowd at her side.
 There is another view of life that says that where there is a crowd there is untruth.
 Consider the extreme case for a moment.
 Even if every individual were, for themselves, in possession of the truth ...

 When they all come together in a crowd, a crowd that is kind of decisive
 relevance would be: a voting, noisy, audible crowd,
 there would be an immediate untruth.
 For a crowd is untruth.
 For in a divine sense it is true, eternal, Christian, as St. Paul says only one achieves the goal.

 Which is not intended in the comparative sense.
 Because comparing refers to others.
 It means that any individual can be that one.
 God helps him with that, but only one achieves the goal.
 And again, this means that everyone should be careful in their relationship to others.
 And essentially should speak only to God in himself.
 Only one achieves the goal. This means again
 that man, being human, is related to divinity.
 In a secular and temporary sense, will be the busy, social and kind man
 be said to be unreasonable for only one to achieve the goal.
 For it is much more likely that many, through their combined strength, would achieve the goal.
 And if we were many, success is more certain, and easier for each individual.
 Certainly it is much more likely, and also true, when it comes to earthly and material things.

 If it can run its own course.
 However, this will be the only correct perspective.
 It neglects God and eternity, and human relationship with the divine.
 It neglects it or turns it into a myth.
 And instead it states, the modern (or we could also say the old pagan) idea that to be a human
 you must belong to a race, endowed with reason.
 Being part of it as a specimen, making the race or species more important than the individual. ”
 This is a hundred years before Nazism.
 “That means that there are no more individuals, only copies.
 But the eternity that far transcends the temporary ...
 Imperturbable like the starry night sky.
 And God in heaven, who rests in the bliss of that sublime,
 without the slightest dizziness at that height, which sees countless crowds,
 and knows every individual by name,
 He, the great researcher, says that only one achieves the goal. ”
 Kierkegaard was a Christian existentialist Protestant.
 Dostoevsky was an Orthodox Christian existentialist.
 And Nietzsche, who was also an existentialist, was one, or perhaps himself the most effective anti-Christian
 philosopher who ever was.
 And it was one of his conscious goals to tear down all the foundations,
 of what was left of Christianity in his day.
 The reason I'm telling that is because existentialism is a strange philosophy.

 It brings together people with very different fundamental assumptions.
 They share a number of assumptions.
 One assumption is that life is, in essence, suffering.
 A second is that the individual has the responsibility to take responsibility
 regarding that suffering.
 And that is the right response, the right response is not nihilism or ideological obsession.
 It's something else, it's something that depends on the person himself.
 Nietzsche draws the same conclusions as Kierkegaard.
 “A traveler who had seen many countries, peoples and continents was asked
 what human qualities he had found everywhere, and he replied, "People tend to be idle."
 Some might think he should have said:
 They are all timid. '
 They hide behind customs and opinions.
 Inside every person knows very well that he is only once in this world,
 as something unique, and that no coincidence, however strange, will make such a unity of it a second time
 such a peculiar and scattered multitude.
 He knows, but hides it like a bad conscience.
 Why?"
 The previous lesson, when we talked about Rogers, not the video lesson, but when we talked about Rogers,
 I was talking about instrumental language.
 And that's the way of speaking you use, which isn't genuine from the perspective of Rogers and the existentialists.

 If the purpose of your speaking is to get something from someone or something.
 If the goal is not just clear communication.
 What that means is that speaking becomes separate from the person.
 And speaking is used as a means of what some part of the personality needs.
 And that's the hiding behind customs that Nietzsche is talking about.
 Because when people use instrumental speaking, they almost always try to get something,
 that other people have said they should want.
 It could be status.
 It could be a promotion.
 Those are two important examples, they could be other forms of material progress.
 But the problem is that only part of the person is speaking.
 And that's the part that's fixated on that particular performance.
 It's not the part trying to find out what could be the truth in this particular situation,
 and describe it as carefully as possible.
 That is the clearest way an individual speaks.
 One of the principles of existential psychotherapy is that that is the only way you can be healthy.
 You have to learn to speak and act as a whole.
 And you must focus on responsibility and the truth.
 The consequences if you don't will be:
 1) that you will suffer meaninglessly, which is the worst kind of suffering, and
 2) Even worse, you will make life miserable for those around you.
 And it gets worse because if you do that long enough ...
 Then you will not only make life miserable for the people around you, but you will want that too.
 And that at least potentially looks like a bad outcome.
 You can say that you can adopt a solid belief system that will keep you from doing so.
 Like the idea of ​​“terror management,” that an ideology protects you from agony.
 Which is a pretty hopeless philosophy.
 Because it basically says that the only reason people have beliefs is
 is because they are terrified without it.
 And that if they show some form of courageous behavior, which is just a facade,
 which is ultimately empty, although necessary.
 That's where the idea of ​​positive illusions came from.
 That life is so awful that unless you lie to yourself to stay calm
 you will be mentally unstable and unhealthy.
 An idea for which there is no hard evidence. Anyway…
 “Because of fear of his neighbor, who stands up to use and veils himself with it.
 But what is it that makes the individual man fear his neighbor?
 To think and act like a flock, and not be happy with oneself?
 A sense of shame, perhaps, on rare occasions.
 In the vast majority, it is the desire for convenience.
 Immobility, in short, that tendency to laziness of which the traveler spoke.
 He is right.
 People are more lazy than timid.
 What they fear most are the issues facing unconditional honesty and nudity
 would burden them.
 Only artists hate this careless life with borrowed manners and somewhat fitting opinions,
 and reveal the secret, every evil conscience.
 The idea that every person is a unique miracle.
 They have the courage to show us the human being to the last muscle.
 He, and he alone.
 More so, that in this rigorous continuous uniqueness, it is beautiful and admirable,
 new and incredible like everything nature does, by no means boring.
 If a great thinker despises men, it is their laziness that he despises.
 Because that makes them look like products from a factory, and
 indifferent, and unworthy of companionship or teaching.
 The person who does not want to belong to the masses only has to stop feeling at ease
 by himself.
 Let him follow his conscience, which cries out to him:
 'Be yourself!'
 What you do, find, and desire at the moment, you are not really. ”
 That's good place to stop. Till Thursday.