The last time we talked, I started to walkyou through the nervous system a little bit
and we started with the monkey business illusion,and one of the things that's really remarkable
about the monkey business illusion is that--andchange blindness illusions in general--is
that demonstrate to you just to what degreeyou could either describe yourself as blind
or focused.
And I think focused is actually better thanblind.
You know, a laser beam doesn't cover mucharea, but it really illuminates what it strikes.
And people are sort of like that, we're reallybeamed into a single point and there's something
metaphysically spectacular about that, I think,because that single point that we're narrowed
down to is in some sense the thing that writesthe world, you know, because as we interact
with the world we're able to turn it one wayor another in all sorts of complicated ways.
And, I mean, I know our powers of doing soare obviously constrained to a substantial
degree, but by the same token, that focalpoint of concentration enables us to interact
with the world and then, at least seemingly,to change it according to our will.
It's like we take a future that's potential,we interact with it at a focal point, and
then it transforms itself into a past that'sin some sense fixed and real.
So that's pretty strange.
So I guess you don't want to underestimatethe utility of a point.
I want to talk to you a little bit first moreabout what you're blind to and then what the
consequences of that are.
So, this here is a little diagram of a computer,believe it or not--a conceptual diagram of
a computer--and it's predicated on...
I'll tell you a quick story.
If I've told you this story please stop me,but I don't think I've told you guys this
story.
So one day back in about 1987 I was workingon my computer and I was typing some long
essay in DOS and, you really had to back upin those days because the programs didn't
do any back up for you and so if the programshut off and you hadn't been super careful
you were just going to lose all of it.
And so that's what happened--I was typingwhen the computer went off and so, I had an
emotional reaction to that.
Right, now an emotional reaction to that iskind of an interesting event because, I would
say that you're not even working with thecomputer until it quits.
And the reason I would say that is because,if you think about it, when the computer is
functioning the fact that it's an extraordinarilycomplicated device is basically irrelevant
to you.
What you're working with, roughly speaking,is the screen, but not really, not even the
screen.
You're working with maybe a phrase or eventhe word that's presented on the screen.
You know, you're typing the word/phrase/sentence/paragraph/essay,and only out past that domain of consideration
do you start thinking about the hardware technologythat underlies what you're doing.
You don't want to think about that at all.
When something's working, you don't have tosee it.
And so that gives you a clue as to consciousness.
Consciousness is an error detecting and correctingphenomena, and you're not conscious of things
that are going well.
You know, which might explain to some degreewhy a lot of our life seems to be made up
of suffering.
If things are going well, it isn't exactlylike you're happy if things are going well,
you just don't notice when they're going well.
Sometimes if they unexpectedly go well, thenthat makes you happy.
But otherwise it's just the same old thing,even if it's amazing.
I was--yesterday--I was eating breakfast withmy son and I was complaining about the fact
that I had to eat canned-smoked tuna becauseI don't really like fish, but I have to eat
fish for a variety of different reasons.
And I thought, Jesus, what're you complainingabout?
I mean, really, do you know what a tuna islike?
Those things are like small whales, right;they weigh like 600 pounds, they're impossible
to catch.
So there's some poor characters out therehauling in tuna, which is impossible--and
then they have to clean them and freeze themand smoke them and can them--and all I have
to do is go to the store and pick up thiscan of tuna and then I can complain about
it for breakfast.
It's really quite staggering, the fact thatI can ever eat tuna is a complete bloody miracle.
But it's not the sort of thing that makesme happy because I just expect that.
Which is very pathetic, but that's how itgoes.
So anyways, back to the computer.
So, it stops working--well, and that's whatI would say I notice the computer.
And there's nothing more annoying then noticinga computer when you're in the middle of writing
an essay because, what the hell do you knowabout computers?
Nothing.
What're you going to do?
Turn it on and off?
Well that's like problem solving process number1.
It usually works--thank god--but if it doesn'twork you're into either the software or the
hardware.
So anyways, I turned it on and off and thatdidn't work, and so then I turned on a light
to see if I could see if something had happenedat the back of it.
But the light didn't go on so I thought, aha,the power probably went out or I blew a fuse,
so I went out to see if the fuse was burntout, but it wasn't.
And then I noticed that all the power in thehouse was off, and then I noticed that--I
went outside to go to the corner store toget something, I don't remember what, and
when I went outside I noticed that all thestreetlights were off.
And then the entire power grid in Montrealwas out.
And then the entire power grid for like halfof Quebec was out.
And a big chunk of Eastern North America.
And do you know why?
Have I told you this story?
Good.
Because there was a solar flare.
And so the sun is a big hydrogen bomb, right.
So I don't know if you guys know this--a cheerfulpiece of information for you if you need to
be cheered up--but if you happened to havea hydrogen bomb and you exploded it--you know
a hydrogen bomb has an atom bomb for its trigger,did you guys know that?
You need to know that because it's important.
Because an atom bomb is a big thing, but it'sjust a trigger for a hydrogen bomb, so a hydrogen
bomb is unimaginably bigger than an atom bomb.
Anyways, if you blew a hydrogen bomb in theatmosphere over Central North America, you
could probably wipe out maybe all of the electronicequipment in the entire continent permanently.
Because what happens is when a hydrogen bombgoes off, there's an electromagnetic burst,
and as the propagates it'll hit your electronicequipment and propagate across the wires and
produce a big spike in current, voltage Ithink, and it'll just blow it.
So your cars won't work, your tractors won'twork, your subways won't work, your cars won't
work, your computers won't work, your satelliteswon't work.
It's like, done.
And also, just to cheer you up even more,back in the late 1800s, I think it was the
1860s, there was this--oh let's go back tothe sun.
So the sun's a big hydrogen bomb and now andthen it freaks out and emits a big solar flare,
which is something that's gone wrong on thesun.
And maybe it blows out this solar flare almostto the orbit of mercury, and then that burst
of radiation comes zooming towards earth andthen 9 minutes later it hits and, if it's
a decent electromagnetic pulse it'll wipeout the power grid in Quebec.
And that's what happened.
So the reason my computer didn't work is becausethe sun was misbehaving.
And so, I like that.
It was very illuminating to me because itjust shows you how many things need to be
stacked on top of each other, working perfectlyfor some thing that you're doing to actually
function.
So anyways, back in the late 1800s in the1860s, there was a massive solar flare and
it produced a bust of power on telegraph linesand it lit some telegraph operators on fire.
And so this does happen--it happens aboutonce a century, and we just missed one last
year.
So while you're worrying about global warmingyou can be considering the much higher probability
that a solar flare will knock out all of ourelectronics and send us back to like 1860.
So the point is that, first of all, there'sa lot of things going on to make up an object
that you don't detect with your vision.
You never think that the reason the computerworks is because the sun is acting properly.
But it is of course the case that endlessnumber of things have to be stabilized that
you don't see.
And you might say, well the sun isn't partof the computer but well, that's wrong.
It's not part of the computer in some sensewhen it's behaving, but as soon as it stops
behaving it's instantly part of the computer.
So here we've got--you might say, well let'ssay the power hadn't gone out and the computer
stopped working.
Well then you might think, well I'll neverbuy that brand again.
And maybe the brand is associated with operationin some country where corruption is rife and
things are made improperly and the parts don'twork very well.
So you might think, well I made a stupid purchasedecision.
And of course that's connected to the politicalsystem of that place and the economy.
And then weird little things can happen downat the micro level as well as the macro level.
So computer chips have now got so small--youknow they have little wires in them right,
the chips--the wires are now so small thatbecause of quantum uncertainty.
So quantum uncertainty basically tells youthat you can't really tell where an electron
is if you want to know how fast it's going.
And you can't tell how fast it's going ifyou want to know where it is.
But more than that it says you can't reallyknow where the thing is, and so what that
means is that once you get your wire shortenough, some of the electrons might not be
in the wires where they're supposed to be,and they actually cause short circuits.
So that's another issue.
There's other levels of reality that are microlevels that you can't detect at all.
So there's macro levels that are way beyondyou, you know, political systems, economic
systems, biological systems, physical systemsoutside of that.
And then there are these Microsystems layeredall the way down, and things can go wrong
at any one of those levels and a lot of thatis invisible to us.
The same thing happens when something goeswrong with you.
It's like, what's wrong with you?
Maybe you're malfunctioning at the molecularlevel.
Your DNA isn't working properly so you getcancer.
Or maybe some virus which is even smallerthan the DNA comes in and takes up residence
and that's really not so good.
Or maybe you're eating something wrong andyou have an organ malfunction.
Or maybe your family's screwed up and you'restressed half to death and the reason they're
screwed up is because you live in, let's saya society that's not friendly to your particular
immigrant type, and so the real reason thatyou're sick is because of people's inability
to get along with one another.
And so on and so forth and so on.
And so god only knows where you're supposedto focus.
But, focus we do.
And one of the things that motivation allowsyou to do is to figure out what you're going
to focus on.
Now you think, god, there's all these thingsto focus on.
There's an infinite number of things to focuson.
How in the world do you ever figure out howto focus on anything?
Well the answer to that is evolution, fundamentally.
You can view evolution in the following way.
You can kind of think about the backgroundof reality--I think the best way to think
about it is as this interplay of patterns,complex patterns sort of like music.
And those patterns are always changing ina sort of dynamic way, and they exist at multiple
levels, just like complex music does.
So then imagine that what you're trying todo is to dance to the music, to align yourself
to the music.
And it keeps changing on you so, well, whatdo you do?
Well if you can change then you can changethe music.
But if you can't change then that's it.
You're not dancing anymore.
Okay, so let's assume that there's two waysof solving that problem.
One way is just sheer number.
You're a single celled organism or a mosquitoand you don't have that much neurocapacity
for transformation and so you don't know whatthe melody is going to be when you lay your
eggs if you're a mosquito and so you producelike a million eggs and some of them can dance
to the current beat and the others can't,and so they all die.
And so that's what happens over the courseof evolution for a very very long time.
The melody keeps changing and then what creaturesdo is propagate a whole variety of variants
of themselves, and in the case of small animalsor fish even or crayfish or that sort of thing,
they just overproduce offspring like mad inhope that one of them can dance to the current
tune.
And then you know, we get three and a halfbillion years later, roughly speaking, here
we all are and what we've got is this dynamicnervous system.
And it enables us to take an external patternand map it to a neurological pattern, or multiple
neurological patterns--because we can interpretthings, right--and then to output that to
multiple behavioural patterns.
And so in some sense, what we've done is we'reinternalised the process of evolutionary variation
into ourselves.
And the more complex, roughly speaking, themore layers your nervous system has--imagine
there's a pattern on your skin, and then that'sinterpreted by a pattern of nerves, and then
those nerves have an output, they're sensorynerves we'll say, and then those have an output
to motor nerves, and then those have an outputto muscles.
That's you, roughly.
You're maybe a four-layer thing in that regard.
But then you grow all these extra layers ofneural tissue, so that the layers are hundreds
of cells thick.
Hundreds of layers thick.
And then you can map a whole bunch of patternsin the external world onto a whole bunch of
patterns in the neural world and then ontoa whole bunch of patterns in the motor world,
and so that makes you dynamically adaptable.
But you learned all that through this incrediblypainful process of evolution which basically
consisted of the death of like 99.999 percentof everything that ever lived.
Species and individuals alike.
Now, why is that relevant?
Well, how do you figure out how to focus inon something?
Well, a big part of that is actually--let'ssee how we do it.
Well first of all, what are you focusing inon here?
Well not poisonous snakes, and rampaging lionsand chimpanzees.
Because they're not in here.
And the reason they're not in here, roughlyspeaking, is because you live in a culture
that's very very highly advanced and it'sgot walls like mad.
This is a--Carcassonne I think, a French city,medieval city.
It still exists.
Beautiful city.
You see how the medieval people solved thisproblem.
It's like, well you can't deal with much.
Well what do you do?
Build some walls, keep a bunch of stuff out.
You don't have to worry about the rampagingbarbarians then because they just can't get
in.
And so a lot of the reason that you can handlethe insane complexity of the world is because
it's not even neurological.
It has virtually nothing to do with your physiology.
It's just that you're in a university.
And the university is protected by the cityand the city is protected by the province
and the province is protected by the countryand the country is protected by all of its
multiple entanglements.
You're inside walls inside walls inside wallsinside walls and so on.
Your world's pretty simple.
You can just sit there in relative warmthand comfort and not have to worry about anything.
And so there's one solution: there's a culturalsolution.
Then inside the cultural solution obviouslythere's architectural solutions of various
sorts.
And then there's political and economic institutionsthat are pretty stable, and they keep you
from having to deal with chaos.
I mean you can see that chaos breaking outa little bit in the previous weeks, in the
American election.
Because the trump people and the left wingersare going at it at the Trump rallies.
And you can see that's just tinder, that couldjust blow up at any point and all of that
protection that's there because all of thesevery complex games that we've agreed to play--like
the democracy game--that just all flies bythe wayside.
And all of a sudden you have to contend withwhat people are like, and that is not something
you want to do.
There's people, man--they're capable of anything.
Which is good, but also really bad.
Well then the next thing is, you've got abody.
Now that's where the evolutionary processreally kicks in.
And so the reason your body is the way itis, roughly speaking, is because it's mimicked
the external environment.
Just like Piaget talks about children usingtheir bodies to mimic the external environment
voluntarily, you know, your body is set upthrough this evolutionary process so that
you can focus on precisely that subset ofthings that seems to keep something like you
going for long enough for you to make anotherone of something that's more or less like
you.
And it only really works for about a hundredyears.
That's pretty much where it tops out.
And so you don't solve the problem very well.
You don't solve the problem of radical complexityvery well.
But you solve it well enough so that you livelong enough to reproduce, speaking strictly
biologically.
And that appears to be good enough.
And part of the reason why you seem to expire,because you might think, well if I--why don't
people just live for like 500 years insteadof 100 years?
Because you'd think that someone who couldcontinue to reproduce for 200 years instead
of 100 years would have it all over for someonewho could only manage it for 50 years, say.
Turns out that your genes have a better timeof it if you just put them into a new body
and shuffle off this mortal coil so you'renot using up too many resources while your
children and grandchildren are trying to survive.
And so that's an evolutionary solution.
Death is not technically inevitable.
There are creatures that are roughly immortal.
Goldfish, for example, which is really annoying.
It's like, really?
Goldfish?
Because they're a carp and carp basicallyjust keep growing.
It isn't obvious that they senesce or age--theyget killed because they get diseases and these
sort of thing, but there are 300 or 400 yearold carp.
And some turtles seem to not age really.
And then of course your DNA has been thereever since life started, so it doesn't really
age either.
And it corrects itself.
So things can last a very very long time.
But not us.
Anyways, we're put inside this body that framesthings for us and starts narrowing things
down.
And our psychophysiological selves have alimited range of interests and desires and
needs--however you want to construe that--andthen that gets instantiated more into the
nervous system.
It's a mistake to think--people always thinkyour brain is in your head, and that's really
not a very bright way of thinking about it.
I don't know exactly why we think that waybecause, well there's the nervous system--you
can see it right there.
There's a lot of your nervous system that'snot in your head.
The motor and sensory systems are distributedthroughout your body.
Your spine is smart enough so that if it getssevered and we put you over top of a treadmill--suspend
you--you can walk.
You don't know you're walking and you can'tcontrol it, but your legs will do a perfectly
good job of walking without you being involvedat all.
So your spine is brain tissue for all intentsand purposes.
Your brain is distributed through your body.
And so, it's evolved so that it's pretty goodat going around specifying what it needs.
And so we talked about the hypothalamus theother day and how it accounts for what I called
sub-personalities that are motivated towardsparticular ends.
And those ends are obviously the things thatwe would identify as fundamental biological
necessities.
But then they transform themselves as we interactsocially into more and more complex fundamental
biological necessities.
It's a tricky thing because people talk aboutneeds as if they're biologically instantiated,
like they're the fundamental building elementsof motivation.
But it's not really that obvious, becauseyou might say, well being hungry is a biological
need but being a doctor isn't.
Well, not really because if you do end upbeing a physician you pretty much solve the
food acquisition problem permanently, right.
So it's just a higher order manifestationof the same thing.
And it's higher order because instead of justeating once you eat every day for the next
40 years.
And instead of just feeding you, you feedyou and your family and maybe some other people
too.
So, thinking of that as something that isn'trooted in biologically is not accurate.
It's kind of a continuous complexification.
From the simple local time-bound immaturesubpersonalities that can only fulfill themselves
in this moment and with help, to the developmentof those circuits--which I would say is your
personality--that are capable of providingyou with what you need in order to live and
to be attracted to other people across verylarge spans of time.
It's like a tree, you know.
It's a like a tree expanding upward.
It's a good metaphor.
Alright, so that's fine.
Motivation sets up your perceptual frame.
And so people often talk about motivationas if it's a drive or a need--not as if those
terms are particularly well-defined.
A drive I suppose is a deterministic sequenceof motor outputs, something like that.
But it's not accurate because the motivationactually specifies what you look at.
It specifies right what you see.
And then it specifies as well what you'regoing to respond to emotionally.
So just imagine this, say I'd offered a 10,000dollar prize to the person who counts the
number of basketballs correctly.
And then you're doing your best to count thenumber of basketballs in the monkey illusion
and then somebody stands up in front of youlike this, and blocks your view.
Well what emotion are you going to feel?
It's a negative emotion, right?
In all likelihood.
And so that might be anxiety, because you'renot going to win.
It might be fear--it's like anxiety becauseyou're not going to win, but also like--fear
because what the hell is this crazy persondoing.
Anger.
Right, that's another negative emotion, althoughthere's a positive attack element to it.
Frustration, disappointment, maybe some grief--awhole undifferentiated mess of negative emotions.
Well why?
Well, in some sense the motivational systemspecifies the map and the goal.
It's a little more complicated than that becauseit also specifies where you are.
But you can think about it as a map with adestination.
That's why stories are like that, becausewe inhabit them.
A map's like that all the time.
And then what emotions do, roughly speaking,is tell you whether or not things are going
the way you want them to as you're on thatpath.
And so the emotions in some sense have tohave a motivational specification before they're
properly functional.
Like, what should you get angry at.
Well generally you get angry at things thateither interfere with your progression towards
a valued goal or upset the entire sub-personalitythat contains the goal itself.
That's a more--what could you call it--that'sa more serious failure.
It's one to fail when you're trying to dosomething, it's another thing to fail so hard
you have to give up the whole project.
We would rather just fail at some sub-elementthan have to give up the whole project, right.
It's one thing to fail an exam, it's anotherthing to fail at university.
And I think the reason for that--I thoughtabout that for a long time--why is it worse
to fail out of university, assuming you wantto be in university, than it is to fail an
exam?
How does your brain compute that?
Because you can't tell all the consequences,right, so it's not self evident.
But it seems to me that it's something like,you think about these functional sub-personalities
as having a temporal and spatial range ofapplication.
So if you're a university student you're sortof stabilized for four years.
Wherever you go, people say "what do you do?"and you can say "I’m a university student."
And everybody's happy about that.
From an economic perspective it's probablyworse than being unemployed, in some sense,
but you can't just go tell people that you'reunemployed and then you have a nice little
high-status slot in society.
It doesn't work that way.
But you can do that as a university student,you know, so it fulfills your social obligations
and it makes you feel like you're doing somethingat least vaguely useful--I mean apart from
the learning and all the other things thatare positive about it.
So what happens is that that map basicallycovers that space and time--the time is four
years and the space is everywhere you go duringthose four years.
Then if that map burns up it's like you'reexposed on all fronts for that entire four
year period.
And that might even be the two years previously.
For example--strange to think that, but ifyou bail out of university half way through
your third year, you've also destructuredthe map that you used to organize your memories,
in some sense, of the previous two and a halfyears.
Because first of all they were the memoriesof somewone who was doing just fine and going
through university, and now all of a suddenthey're the memories of someone who failed.
Those aren't the same memories.
And so it's weird that an error can alterthe past, but it can and often does.
I mean any relationship breakup that's ofany significance will do exactly the same
thing, especially if you were betrayed, right.
It's like, it's not just the present and thefuture that dissolve into chaos and take you
on a little trip to the underworld.
It's also your revision--the necessity ofrevising your past.
So anyways, so then I would say well--failinga class--well the class restructures you in
some sense and focuses you for a certain subsetof the general going-to-university map.
So it's going to be less traumatizing to dopoorly on a class than it is to fail out of
university because the amount of space andtime that those respective maps covers differs.
So what you're trying to do always is to layout a functional game--that's a good way of
thinking about it--on the space-time territorythat you inhabit.
And if you understand that then you can startto understand a little bit about emotions.
Now, okay, I have to put a little coda inthere and that's: motivations and emotions
are not technical terms.
They're sort of like id and ego.
They're terms that you can use to structurea debate.
I showed you the hypothalamus and you seeit's made out of all those little nuclei--they're
not the same, so you can't say that everypart of the hypothalamus is doing something
that you can fit into a class: motivation.
And motivations and emotions overlap, so,I would say hunger--some of them oversee more
purely motivation.
If you have an unsettling altercation withsomeone, it tends not to make you hungry.
Whereas it might make you angry, it mightmake you happy, it might make you sad.
So hunger is something that seems to pop upone of these maps and then emotions guide
your way through it or tell you where youare on it.
But then you have complex motivation-emotionslike pain, and also anger.
Because pain has a goal in it, right--getaway.
Or stop, or get away--it's usually get away--butit also has an emotional feeling, right.
It feels bad.
So it feels like an emotion, pain.
Grief is like pain.
Disappointment is like pain.
Loneliness is like pain.
And I mean this technically--all of thosethings can be addressed rather successfully
with opiates, by the way.
So technically they're the same.
But pain--is being hurt an emotion?
Well people will say that, "well I feel hurt."
Whatever.
And anger is another one of those that's sortof ambivalent because anger has a goal, right:
remove obstacle.
Remove or destroy obstacle.
In a sense, that's the goal of anger.
But people talk about it as an emotion.
So we're oversimplifying.
But it doesn't matter because it's a usefuloversimplification and that's sort of what
a theory is: a useful oversimplification.
Alright, so I kind of laid out what I think are the basic
motivations there.
Hunger, thirst, pain, anger, thermoregulation--youdon't want to be too hot or too cold--panic
or escape, affiliation or care, sexual desire,exploration, play.
And you can kind of divide those into self-maintenancemotivations and self-propagation motivations,
roughly speaking.
Sort of just a way to keep track of them.
And then emotions--so the hypothalamus isinvolved in a lot of that.
It's not the only thing but it's involvedin a lot of that.
And so here's sort of how I've conceptualizedone of these maps.
And we've seen this thing before.
You're at point A because if you're usinga map, or if you're in a game, there's a starting
point or you're a player--either way there'syou there--and then you're going somewhere
and you have to do something to get there.
Okay, so that's the little map, and maybeyou have to go make a peanut butter sandwich
or you have to go turn the thermostat downor you need to call your friend or whatever.
But it's the same kind of structure that you'reusing in all those different situations.
And they switch, you know.
Now you're finished being hungry.
Now you're thirsty.
Then you're lonesome.
It's like Sisyphus.
It's one damn thing after another, roughlyspeaking.
And so that's what keeps you alive.
And you have to be chasing things all thetime because your natural tendency is to run
out of fuel and decay.
That's entropy--you have to fight that.
And so that's a continual battle because you'repretty organized and it's really hard for
something that organized to just stay organized.
It's a lot easier--there's a million waysto mess up your room.
There's like one way to clean it.
Or maybe 10, you get the point.
And it's the same with anything that's extraordinarilycomplex.
There's not that many ways it can stay inorder and there's a lot of ways it can fall
apart.
That's why you're running all the time ona treadmill.
You're fighting the second--is it the secondlaw of thermodynamics.
Is entropy the second law of thermodynamics?
I think so.
That's a major one, so good luck in your scrap.
Because you're going to need it.
So these little underlying biological systemspop up the primary maps and then those are
elaborated upwards into maps that are moreand more complicated.
And the more and more complicated maps maybesolve two problems at the same time for a
week.
Or they solve 10 problems at the same timefor 20 years.
That's why you want a job or a career: a wholebunch of problems are solved immediately as
soon as you're employed.
I mean, you have some other problems, butthat's inescapable anyways.
Okay so you're inside one of these so you'realways motivated.
You're always running around after something.
And that's another thing to know too becausethe basic state of human beings is not quiescence,
you know.
You're not napping in front of a fireplace.
If you're not pursuing something that you'remotivated to pursue, then generally what you're
doing if figuring out how to pursue otherthings that you're motivated to pursue.
And that's exploration.
And so if you're not actively motivated bybiological necessity, we'll say for the sake
of simplicity, then the next motivation kicksin, which is well, prepare for the next time
that you are so motivated.
And that really accounts for our capacityto explore.
We're always zooming around the world tryingto figure out what to do with it next, you
know.
Acquiring more information or--even when we'reentertaining ourselves because we're almost
always looking at stories when we entertainourselves.
We're still acquiring information that hasfunctional significance and so attractive
to us that we find it innately rewarding justto observe that sort of thing.
It's even in strange situations, like peoplewill go to horror movies.
What's wrong with them?
Why do you want to go and get scared?
Or disgusted?
Because that's horror, right--fear and disgust.
Plain uncertainty horror movies like The BlairWitch Project, that's pretty much all fear.
And then the slasher movies and that sortof thing, that's pretty much all disgust.
And you might say, well why bother exposingyourself to that.
And part of it is: to get over it.
You know, it's exposure.
Because life has terrifying elements and ithas disgusting elements, and you're going
to have to learn to maintain yourself in theface of that.
Certainly illness is going to challenge yourcapacity to deal with disgust.
There's any number of reasons to be terrifiedso, you go to movies and you practice facing
it.
And you observe that you can.
I mean there's other motivations too, butthose are sort of the healthy ones that go
along with people wanting to expose themselvesto dangerous situations.
So even in that you see exploration and preparationfor what's going to happen next.
And the exploratory circuit is a very veryfundamental circuit.
It's also hypothalamically mediated.
So, the way the hypothalamus works--it's quitecool--is that, on one hand it pops up all
these little maps that you can occupy thathave their core in, we'll say, biological
necessity--so roughly Freud's id--but whenthose things all shut down because they're
satiated, that's a technical term by the way--satiated,it means satisfied--it's a form of reward.
So it's sort of how you feel after you'veeaten a good meal and you're in a warm room
and your friends are around you and maybeyou go to sleep if it's your family.
Because--I'm thinking of thanksgiving or somethinglike that--everything is just taken care of
and so you fall asleep.
That's satiation.
You can see that in animals all the time becausethey spend a lot of time satiated.
Dogs: they sleep a lot.
Cats: they sleep a lot.
Because they've already attacked their catfood and so that's pretty much it for the
day.
Human beings, we tend not so much to enterinto states of satiation.
Now what happens when you're in one of thoselittle units--one of those little motivated
things--there's a couple of things that canhappen.
[Muttering].
Okay so we talked about motivations as sortof setting up this little frame.
And then we can talk about emotions.
So, there you are going somewhere.
And there's this little straight line that'lltake you there, this nice efficient way to
get there.
Now why do you want to do it efficiently?
Well, because you use up the least amountof resources like that so you can maintain
some resources for doing the next thing youneed to do.
So you care about efficiency and simplicity.
So you want to go like the crow flies to thedestination.
So then, what happens along the way?
Well, let's say you just get to go straight.
Well basically what happens is that you'remotivated by your perception of the goal or
intermediary goals because the goal can belinked together, and then as long as things
are going according to plan, as you move towardsthe goal in an untrammelled way you're going
to feel mild positive emotion.
And the reason for that is that you're turningthe environment--the environment almost never
has...
most of it (the environment) is irrelevant.
The rest of it has a positive or negativevalence.
And if things are going according to planit has a mild positive valence, right.
You think things are okay, and really whatyou're doing is you're observing two things.
You're observing that the things that shouldbe happening, if you know what you're doing
while you're acting, are happening.
And so each step forward is an indicationthat you're getting closer to your goal.
That's incentive reward.
And that's the sort of reward that you actuallythink of as fun.
An incentive reward is produced by activationof the exploratory system that's in the hypothalamus--it
has its roots in the hypothalamus--and that'sthe dopaminergic system.
And that's the system that cocaine and amphetaminesand all those drugs that people really like
to take hyperactivates, making them feel likethey're doing something important and useful.
Even though, in all likelihood, they're not.
So the dopaminergic drugs in some sense hijackyour incentive reward systems.
And it's incentive reward because you're incentivizedto continue moving forward.
Anything that you look at that makes you wantto touch it or move forward to it basically
activates the dopaminergic system.
Now, so you say, well what happens when you'reon your way to somewhere.
Well, roughly what happens is neutral things,which is okay.
You can ignore them.
Positive things or negative things.
Positive things happen when things are goingaccording to plan or even better than according
to plan.
You're walking to school, it's raining, somebodyyou know stops and offers you a life.
It's like, well you're doing okay gettingto school and that was fine, but all of a
sudden you're getting there a little fasterand you're not getting wet.
So that cheers you up.
It's an indication that you're able to saveresources while you're moving towards a goal--dopaminergically
mediated.
You know, and then we can imagine a differentscenario where you're walking to school in
the rain and someone drives by you, maybeit's even the same friend, and they don't
see you and there's a puddle right besideyou and not only do they not stop but they
completely cover you with oily and frigidwater, and so that's not so good.
You're angry about that and upset.
Why?
Well, you might say, "my day is ruined."
What does that mean exactly?
Well it means that you had a little map ontop of your day and you were hoping that the
day and the map would correspond, and thenall of a sudden the map burned up and god
only knows what's going to happen to the day.
And so it's like the bottom has dropped outof your map.
And so then you have to worry about your clothesand catching cold and all those things.
And turning around and going home and whatit'll mean if you miss class and so on and
so forth.
So basically that's the domain of chaos thatwe talked about.
So that's a negative thing, but it's also--thething about negative things is they're sort
of hard to disentangle from unexpected things.
You know, because most of the things thathappen to you that are negative are also unexpected
because you don't go around trying to makenegative things happen.
So well, what happens when something negativehappens?
Well, you get a negative emotion.
Pain, anxiety, disgust.
Those seem to be the big three.
And they're mediated by different systems.
We don't understand the disgust system verywell.
It doesn't load with neuroticism because allthe other negative emotions load with trait
neuroticism.
Pain--pain seems to be what you experienceif your receptive surfaces are--you know if
your physiological self is subject to stimulationof an intensity that's sufficient either to
damage it or to damage the receptors.
You know, but pain is complicated.
It's not just physical pain from physicaldamage.
It depends on how you define physical damage.
If someone dies, that's pain.
If you're alone and isolated, that's pain.
If you're depressed, that's pain.
If you're frustrated or disappointed, that'spain.
Frustrated might mean something gets in theway of you moving towards a goal, and disappointment
might mean the whole damn structure just collapsedon you.
Either way, that's pain.
Now the behaviourists would have called thatan unconditioned--like a painful stimulus--they
would've called that an unconditioned stimulus.
You don't have to learn for it to be bad.
It's sort of built in bad.
And they would think about anxiety in responseto the unexpected as learned.
The behaviourists would think that you needto learn what predicts something painful.
And if you learn that something predicts somethingpainful then you get anxious to it or afraid
of it.
But it turns out that it's more complicatedthan that.
So what the behaviourists would think is thatpain in some sense is the fundamental negative
emotion.
And then maybe you're a kid and you standup underneath a table and you whack your head
on it when you're learning to walk.
And then when you go under the table now youget anxious because you've learned that if
you stand up under the table, you bang yourhead and that hurts.
So anxiety under those circumstances is alearned behaviour.
It's a conditioned response.
Got it?
Okay, but it's more complicated than thatbecause anxiety can also be an unlearned response.
So if you just encounter something you'venever seen before, it's going to make you
anxious.
There's actually a circuit that mediates anxiety.
It's not just a secondary derivation of thepain circuitry.
It's its own little unit.
And it's sort of like you've figured out overtime--evolutionary time--not to get hurt because
you don't want to be damaged.
But then, you've learned how to detect theprobability that you will get hurt for so
long that you've also evolved a system justto respond to that.
And so some of that responds to things thatyou have learned are dangerous.
Some of it responds to things that are generallyjust dangerous.
Blood, spiders, insects of various sorts,facial expressions that indicate fear or disgust
or anger, broken limbs, bodies--especiallymutilated ones.
You know what's in horror movies, that's allsort of primary fear stimuli, right.
And it's built right into you.
Now psychologists debate about whether it'sbuilt in or whether you can just learn it
really easily.
But I would say that there's sort of a continuum.
Some of it seems pretty damn built-in.
Snake-fear, for example.
Chimps who've never seen snakes, you bringone into their cage--if it's a rubber snake--poof,
they hit the roof.
And then they look at it.
And snakes in the wild, a chimp will go upto a big snake in the wild and hoot at it.
They have a special snake--they call it asnake [rah?]--and they'll look at the thing,
and some of them will just look at the snakefor like 24 hours.
So, partly they're afraid of it.
Partly they want to explore it.
So what they do, they get close to it andthe fear increases, and then they back up
and the fear decreases and the curiosity increases.
And so what happens is that they move backand forth until they're right on the line
where they're afraid, but they're curious.
So then they're stuck, and they're lookingat it.
And you experience that all the time actually,because when you are engaged in something
that's meaningful, that's where you are.
And that's like the line between order andchaos.
You know, because you want to solve it--it'simportant.
Maybe you're reading papers about some illnessthat you hope to work on or study.
It's like, well you're worried about the damnillness, you know.
All you're doing is confronting it throughthe papers so, you know, you're fairly well
sheltered from it.
But you don't want it to exist and you'd ratherit wasn't around, but you're curious so you're
going to get engrossed in it.
And most of you, to the degree that you'reimmersed in anything, are partly immersed
because you perceive it as a problem.
So that's like existential anxiety in a sense.
It's just part of being.
There's problems that have to be solved.
They produce anxiety, they're complicated.
You find this--you find a way of approachingthem so that the anxiety doesn't overwhelm
you and so the curiosity is optimized--that'san incentive reward activation--and then you're
awake.
Because the anxiety keeps you awake and sodoes the curiosity.
And you think, yeah, this is a good placeto be.
And it is a good place to be because you'reoptimally protected right there and you're
optimally learning.
So yes, that's a good place to be.
You can think about that as an answer to theNietzschean problem of how you create value.
You don't exactly create it--you find it.
There's problems that need to be solved, theyautomatically engage your emotions--both positively
and negatively--you've got to find the rightbalance.
And it's something like contending, you know.
It seems to me like humans beings have tohave something to contend with, or they can't
tolerate themselves.
Because life seems like a stupid joke if youdon't have something worthwhile to do.
But you can have something worthwhile to do.
And so then maybe it's not so stupid and absurdand tragic.
And that's at least a good way to think aboutit.
(00:48:00)So you've got satiation on the one hand, on
the positive side, and the behaviourists would'veconsidered that an unconditioned response
too.
They really thought about that as a rewardinitially.
You know, so you take a rat--he's hungry--andyou feed him something: reward.
Now Skinner, he used to train rats, right,and he was a very--what would you call it--very
well renowned behavioural psychologists.
And he could train rats to do damn near anything.
And what he would do is starve them to threequarters of their body weight--they were basically
hungry rats.
They were hungry lonesome rats because theylived an isolated existence, which rats don't
like, and then they were starved down to threequarters of their body weight.
When the behaviourists used rats as a modelfor people, they actually used hungry lonesome
rats as a model for rats as a model for people.
And you might think, well what kind of modelis that?
But it turns out it's a pretty good model,because you're a lot more like a scared hungry
rat than you'd like to admit.
Which is partly why you can empathize withone, right.
Everybody's sitting there thinking "oh thepoor rats".
By the way, the more you thought that, themore agreeable you are.
So how many people were feeling pretty sorryfor those rats?
Yeah.
How about men?
How many men were feeling sorry for thoserats?
Oh yeah, about three.
There's a big gender difference in agreeablenessbetween men and women, by the way.
Just so you know--we'll talk about that more.
So now the behaviourists also thought thatyou have this primary set of rewards, call
them unconditioned, and then you had to learnthat some things predicted them.
Like, classically maybe, a rat would pusha lever and get a pellet.
Soon he's pushing that lever like mad.
He's pretty happy about pushing that lever.
And he learned the conditioned associationbetween lever pushing and getting a reward.
But it turns out that because that's beenaround for so long, you also have a system
for it.
So it's not just a learned association towhat satiates you--it's a whole system.
And that's the dopaminergic system.
The serotonin system seems to be the thingthat satiates.
So you know, if you have a big turkey dinner,up goes the serotonin levels--you don't have
to do anything.
And serotonin is a calming and regulatingneurochemical.
Which is why antidepressants stop your neuronsfrom taking up serotonin before you've had
a real chance to use it to regulate your nervoussystem.
But dopamine tells you, hey, good things areon their way.
And that's pretty much what people run on.
And you can think about that as hope.
So incentive reward is sort of like hope,or promise.
I think promise is a better term.
So there's pain and satiation, and those arereally ancient systems.
And then there are newer systems that areanxiety and promise.
And those are related to those more fundamentalnegative and positive emotions.
And those things regulate you while you'reon your path.
Now, there's one more level of complication,because you think, well what can happen on
the way to your goal.
Nothing?
Irrelevant.
Okay, so that's the irrelevance that enablesyou to not see the gorilla.
And almost everything around you is irrelevant.
And I think that's partly why I think peopledon't like to have their little maps of the
world destroyed.
Because if your map of the world is thoroughlydemolished everything becomes relevant.
And you do not want everything to become relevant.
It's just too much for you.
So you wake up and you're naked and it's darkin the middle of a jungle.
It's like, everything's relevant!
You're not going to like that.
It's going to burn you out quick.
And so most of the time you have to be protectedso that almost everything's irrelevant.
And then you can focus on the few things thatyou're capable of handling, and you do that.
So you're in your little map, and then asyou move towards it your emotions play.
And the negative emotions appear when thingsare not going well and the positive emotions
appear when things are going well.
That's basically how your emotions work.
Now, you've got your satiation and your pain.
Then you've got your threat and your promise.
Then on top of that you've got a more complicatedthing which is novelty, because that's the
other thing that can happen when you're onthe way from point A to point B. Something
you didn't expect--and you don't understand.
So 
you're walking down the street and there'ssomeone laying there face-down on the sidewalk.
And you know, they're dishevelled, and sowell, what's your emotional response?
Well you didn't expect it, so you're goingto be taken aback a bit: that's anxiety.
It's like, you're moving towards your goaland anxiety stops you.
Now you can think of the space-time area aroundthat person as unexplored territory.
Now you don't want any unexplored territoryin your map because god only knows what's
going to happen there.
So what're you supposed to do?
Well maybe you cross the street--you thinkwell that person's drunk or maybe you think,
well they're a homeless person.
Maybe they're lying on a sleeping back--youthink they're just asleep.
You're going to stop and then you're goingto observe, and then you're going to use little
cues to try to put your map back together.
And your map is, what’s going on here andwhat should I do about it?
And so, it's partly this interplay betweenanxiety and curiosity.
Now you can just step around it and continue,but maybe that'll upset your moral map--what
kind of person am I?
Maybe I should have done something about it.
Or maybe you think, there's no damn way I'mgoing to get involved in this because, who
knows what'll happen if I step in there.
And you know, fair enough, because, who knowswhat'll happen if you step in there.
The point is that, it's like your map whichhas made everything irrelevant has got a hole
in it and now some of what's complicated isshining through.
And that thing that's shining through--sothat's like what the phenomenologists talked
about as shining forth--that thing that'sshining through, it's like you don't know
what to do about it.
What should you do?
Well, you should do what you do do, and whatyou do is, you prepare to do everything.
And that's an emotional response to novelty.
Well, if you don't know what to do you shouldprepare yourself for anything.
And that's stress.
You could prepare that something good willhappen.
Let’s say you're in an ambivalent.