Angelo  0:14  
Welcome to entanglement radio on the conversations from the brink network. I am your host Angelo avec. And this show is all about the potential and possibilities of what it means to be human. Our guest today is an evolutionary philosopher and systems designer Daniel smocked and burger. And we are going to be talking all about, obviously, our human potential, but we're going to be talking about blending, science, spirituality, philosophy, how we create meaning in our lives. And talk about this idea of emergence in synergy and a self organization, self organizing universe, which are, I think, really important concepts, concepts to understand and really appreciate How we can implement those in our lives so that we can make the changes necessary. Coming up next week we have Lisa knops. She's the author of six award winning books of creative nonfiction. And we're going to talk about the cultural and spiritual factors that lead to women's bodies issues, eating disorders, and ageism. So I'm excited about that. If you'd like to know more about myself or the show, my website is Angelo avec calm. And you can find me on Facebook and on Twitter at hestia health. And you can also find out more about this show entanglement radio and my project conversations from the brink, which is all about talking about insight and inspiration for humanity's next step. And that's conversations from the brink calm. So with that, I want to introduce my guests. Daniel has a transdisciplinary science background with the whole system's complexity and integral framework. He loves solving seemingly intractable problems by reassessing the foundational data of axioms of the field and then restructuring it from the ground up. Daniel was the academic dean for college of Mind Body medicine and has consulted for many cutting edge integrative doctors and medical clinics to find help find novel solutions. For complex cases, you created and ran a cutting edge Think Tank developing complex system solutions for viral mental and social issues, and has directed a transdisciplinary group of scholars on a philosophy of mine project addressing core questions of mind brain interface and developing axiomatic reformulation for the geology of neuroscience. Wow, that's a mouthful. But with that I feel very honored and blessed to welcome Daniel to the program. Hi, Daniel. How you doing?

Daniel  2:43  
Good. I'm happy to be here. Thanks for having me.

Angelo 2:46  
Well, I'm excited. You know, as I'm connecting with you, and I'm reading about all of these different projects that you do, one of the things that I find really interesting with people who kind of have I've been involved in over so many different disciplines and fields of study is, what is it that drives you?

Daniel 3:12  
It's the intersection of a number of things. So I'm probably like most people very moved by suffering suffering of other sentient beings, humans and non humans and how to reduce that eliminate the foundational causes of it. This is a core call for me in life that is across all different topics. I'm also called by the positive side of their experience. So how do we create world systems that make possible and induce not only less suffering, but higher quality of life across all meaningful aspects of what quality of life is for all life now and ongoingly and all the different facets that come together to make that possible? And Also just by a deep love of universe, which leads to a fascination and wanting to learn all that all that I can which of course, it ends up applying itself to the previous topics, but is a is a lower in and of itself.
Well, I, I think I want to start with this idea. So I was watching this short talk that you gave and you were talking about the evolutionary universe story, kind of the ones that we've been able to piece together now, which is much more whole and complex and very different from kind of the way that we look at things in science where we like to get mechanistic, and break things down into parts that we can then analyze. And so I want you to give us a view of the way that you see this, this universal story and tell us about what it means to be self organizing.

Daniel 4:59  
There's a lot of there. So, to really have a proper context for the scientific worldview scientific process as we know it and what we call reductionist thinking, it's important to kind of understand how it emerged. So, when we look at Copernicus, Galileo, Descartes, Newton, this was really what helped to deliver us from the Dark Ages, where people had different religious ideas about the nature of absolute reality, that were the basis of crusades, and the burning of witches and you know, so many things that had no empirical basis, and empiricism being able to say hey, wait, no matter what we think it is. We might not be able to agree on God's name, but we can agree on the speed of sound we can agree on the speed of light, we can agree on whether and solve problems we hadn't been able to solve like LA or finding the rate of things falling It seemed like not only the ability to explain a tremendous amount which it was, and to empower us with application and technology, which it was but also a way to get everybody on the same page. Because if there is objective, empirical reality, independent of our beliefs about it, and we can all kind of find that out, there's a profound unification of that. So it's important to understand how crucial that is, and also why it you know, emerged with the philosophical kind of fervor that it had of a movement away from subjective based belief systems towards object based belief systems. Now, of course, then the problem ended up becoming in the huge success of that, that when we define what is real by what's measurable, what's objective, what is available to empiricism, then we ended up defining that which is subjective as not real. Just by definition, right, that becomes part of that axiom. And so then consciousness and our whole interiority is not real, right? Its first person stuff and science is the domain of third person stuff. And as science has continued to be able to explain so many things that we had previously had in spiritual, philosophic, religious categories and able to explain them better in many ways, this has led to the whole technological advancement of humanity, which is, you know, beautiful and the downside of it, of course, is it has no interiority. 
So either conscious that consciousness is not real at all, or it's the somehow emergent property of brains and neural networks, that usually leads to interpretations of having no agency meaning etc. And so as we take some of the next steps in our understanding of the universe, beyond some of the early religious concepts and beyond the earlier scientific concepts to basically just progress aggressively better and better and more nuanced and more interconnected understandings of the nature of the reality we're in, we start to look at within even within third person even within what science looks at that in very complex systems like biologic systems, there are so many variables interacting so dynamically that To try and understand those systems by just looking at individual parts, which seemed to make a lot of sense for us, right like when you think about in the time of early science that we could calculate a ballistic curve that we had done the pendulum dowsing before. Now we could use Newtonian mechanics and calculus to plot that curve perfectly. But there were only two variables we had to affect right was just the the angle of the cannonball and how much gunpowder we put in, we could take what seemed like a difficult scenario and reduce it to a small number of variables and have a tremendous amount of insight and impact, but in certain kind of complex systems where the Variables actually do different things in relationship with other variables than they do on their own. And where they, where they interact so quickly and complex Lee reductionism has limits of how explanatory and how useful it can be. And so we've had an emerging field of system science, how do we understand whole self interacting systems. 
And one of the key insights here is that when we take the parts of part like, say, we take a cell, we take it apart, and we look at each individual type of molecular structure, we look at the organelles, we look at the organic molecules that make it up, none of those organelles, none of those molecules on their own brief. And yet the cell as a whole breeze until we say what part brains and none of them do, right. It is the complex, orderly relationship of all those parts in that way that leads to respiration and life as a whole as an emergent property. And so this property of synergy was just the behavior of a whole system that's not found in the parts taken. Separately is a is something where reductionism isn't able to give us the whole picture, understand the parts is important. It's just not the whole thing, understanding how the parts come together and what the relationships are, that aren't found in the parts separately. And what the hole is, is also a big part of the picture. So this is where kind of the fields of system science and complexity science has emerged and given us better insights even into the nature of third person physical reality. And then we also have this movement to look at what if consciousness first person experience isn't well explained exclusively as an emergent property of physical systems, right brain etc. 
And even if it was, if I'm looking at the eg of a Buddhist monk who's in some deep meditative state, I can explain their eg patterns but have no idea what their experiences like or how to get there. And so there is a need for a process of I'm Understanding the texture and the nature of subjectivity of consciousness at first person, this is beyond third person completely So, sciences going through or our, our philosophic system that science is a part of is going through an evolution to include more complex understanding of the nature of third person and a deeper understanding of the nature of First Person and how those come together wasn't that was very well explained. I so as I'm listening to say this and many people in in my community and so I have a largely spiritually based community and we like to cherry pick science to validate our spiritual beliefs, which I kind of find annoying, but anyway, we will. What I I understand what you were saying, but why do we need to quantify and categorize and and understand subjective experience, why can it not just be something that runs maybe parallel? Or why do they? I don't think I even Why do we need to have an explanation for that experience? Why can't the experience be part of the package of the whole? Does that make sense? I will speak to what I think makes sense. 
Okay. Couple things. Say you take a system like Buddhism, where there are certain kinds of processes that are for rather than exploring this nature of physical reality, right, the speed of sound or the pH of a, of a fluid. They're exploring aspects of one's own conscious experience. So do this kind of breathing, pay attention to these kinds of things, move your attention in these ways, and then notice what you experience and this is both Because if many people do that, and they find some similar things independent of being pre suggested to look for certain things, then not just, we're not just exploring subjectivity, we're getting through this inter subjective exploration of what might be true about consciousness about experience as a whole, that informs all of us and we just become better at navigating our own internal landscape, right. So this is relevant if we want to be able to move out of anxiety and depression and etc, into states of subjective experience that are more fun to be in and more creative and make our availability to others better. And so it's, it's not simply to like prove something, it's actually learned the contours of the dimension of universe the subjective dimension so that we can navigate it better and understand it better right and understand because it's fascinating. But also understand so that we can navigate and help others to. I would also say that why it's relevant to really understand the relationship between consciousness and physics between mind and brain body is one and we live in a system in a world right now where science has had so much explanatory power and you know, has been able to make the radically complex technology that's allowing you and I to talk wirelessly across the world right now and then for this to be heard by all your listeners and, and have us exploring Mars and deep reaches the brain all like this because of its explanatory power. 
It has become the dominant philosophical system and if it's a philosophic system, that ultimately in most interpretations says what's real is physical stuff, right? This is called physicalism. Physical particles are real and consciousness either doesn't exist at all with you called radical luminous Word exists, but it actually couldn't have agency right? It arises as this emergent property from the brain and therefore, it can witness only but has no causal influence, which is an inexorably Neil list, right meaningless view, that's a real bummer. And it's not just a real bummer. It's a real problematic thing for science being perceived as uncomfortable with ethics, right? Because ethics involves the experience of sentient creatures in science, you know, that's not its domain. And so we have this technological force, right science as a system of seeing the world that gives rise to technology that gives rise to the way we're building and affecting the world that affects subjective experience, but without any compass or guidance system, because it doesn't commensurate with ethics. So it's very important to actually have a deep scientific exploration of the nature of consciousness so that we can actually affect and direct the development of technology right In the development of our built world, and I don't think that I'm disagreeing with you, I think that that's an important piece. But I also find that the experience aspect the not because I feel and this is actually something that I have been working through and, and in my world, we talk about the masculine and feminine energies and I tend to be very, like I spend a lot of time in my mind, I spend a lot of time in deep contemplation, thinking about the things and one of the things that I have been exploring as this idea of embodiment, and instead of thinking about what it is that I'm doing, being in the experience, which to me is slightly different. 
It's not about better or worse. It's not a value judgment that this is the correct way this is the wrong way. But there is something different about having the awareness from an intellectual perspective and embodying The experience and I think that that's where, you know, I do a lot of work with cancer survivors and we they get a lot of people telling them a lot of the research and this is what needs to do, but one of the reasons they told me they really like to come to my classes because I create we create meaning from, from data we create meaning from story and experience and being not just like the other day we talked about Candace pert and she wrote a book called the molecules of emotion which are all about, you know, neuro peptides and the, the connections between like the bio biochemical correlate to the motion basically and then we went and we had the inter meditation and we connected very metaphorically energetically spiritually with our emotional bodies. And so there was this play between understanding you know, Dr. pert and her amazing Research and then we had the experience of the embodiment of that emotion in itself. And so that's where I kind of where I'm looking at your stuff. And it's just incredibly fascinating and I love it. But it's so intellectual. And I just, I also interview a lot of people that talk about, you know, the heart. And I know we can obviously talk very biologically about the heart, but talk about the heart more metaphorically or spiritually, where do you feel that that fits in to this idea of emergence and this self organizing universe?
I gave you a lot there again. Great. I think we create false dichotomies that lead to either unnecessarily polarized partial views or kind of pendulum swinging back and forth between partial truths. And we need to learn how to transcend the false dichotomy. So for instance, embodied menten experience versus intellect and understanding or heart versus mind, there's no versus right? It's how do we evolve and expand both and the relationship for the full human experience? And so let's say, let's say we talk about any kind of very deep, transpersonal, personal, numinous spiritual experience. So let's say we talk about a vision quest or a medicine journey. Okay? So say we take a medicine journey, and someone has an experience, right? They're having a very real, deep, profound, maybe, you know, life altering experience, then they come out of it. And they're going to interpret that through a cognitive model. And so say someone goes into a journey and part of what happened there was a dark part of the journey and they saw monsters chasing them, which is, this is not an uncommon thing, and they come out and there's a particular worldview that says, Well medicine was letting you see into the astral realm and there are monsters in the astral realm that are actually after you because whatever you did bad things in the past life, and that's just where they are. And so now you need to put crystals around yourself and into the person having more fear more disempowerment, etc. 
Or someone else has the exact same experience. And they have a different kind of worldview facilitation that says, maybe the monsters were the way that your mind brain complex, symbolically represented. unresolved fears and emotions maybe you know, represents issues you have with your parents or whatever in childhood. Let's try again and now and then the person faces the monster and then the monster becomes their dad and then they make peace with their dad and then it becomes their dads and her child and that this whole healing model actually ends up affecting the meaning you make ends up affecting how that experience is stored, how its interpreted and how it becomes a part of your Behavioral and experiential basis for the rest of your life. So, if I only did the cognitive side and talk to people about, like we're talking now, the worldview of psychedelics, and no one ever had an experience with it, for instance, or meditation or whatever they are, we also wouldn't get there. So it really is at the synergy of people's experience and working with technologies and processes, like meditation, like breath work, like transpersonal psychology, like psychedelics like whatever, right? Working with technologies and processes that are deeply experiential, deeply embodied, and also being able to go into those as best pre framed as possible because of what we've learned from previous people's experience, and interpret them as best as possible within our cognitive model. So in what I would call a full human experience, someone's thinking and their intuiting would actually align and they would continue to work on developing and advancing both of them as necessary parts of a full human experience.

Angelo 22:08  
Right on I'm like, I'm definitely in your choir on that. I love that.

Daniel 22:13  
So let's talk about this idea. I use the word Mr. Jensen, you use the word synergy. And I'm looking through your website so that often right now we are having emergence through emergency and I, I just love that idea. Because I've always kind of referred to it as the band aid approach that we see something that pops up and then we find the easiest solution, the path of least resistance to deal with that one little thing without looking at, you know, the systemic issues underneath. So I was hoping that you could talk about this idea of emergence through emergency and how individuals can can help shift us out of that, I guess, mode of dealing with things yeah. So this was a, a term first coined, as far as I'm aware by Buckminster Fuller, and really talked about it as a sociological, but even just a deeper universal process where sometimes emergency and this is the same as Necessity is the mother of invention and so many concepts like this, but where an emergency motivates a foundational level shift that wouldn't have been motivated previously, or wasn't being motivated previously. And so of course, we can have a situation where a problem arises, and we just deal with it reactively post facto in a bandaid way, and we'd see that all over the place and it's, it might be necessary, but it's inadequate, we really care about. There are other times where an emergency is big enough that rather than just put a bandaid on it and then move back to life as it was it actually requires some core restructuring at a personal level of our life or at a collective level of how We organize right as a as a species or technologically are. We we have so many scenarios where like, as we were getting into World War One which represented this level of war and existential threat we hadn't had, we ended up developing some new technologies that became the basis of how the world became interconnected transportation and communication technologies. 
As we're getting into World War Two, we mined more copper in the first year the US joined World War Two than we had in the whole previous history of humanity, which then ended up leading to the electrification of the world and then the interconnected communication of the world Cold War giving rise to us becoming, you know, an interplanetary species so that we you can see that we continued with the warning direction, so there's a deeper set of shifts ahead for us, but probably so many people who are listening and part of your community of experienced it, whether it was a cancer diagnosis, or whether it was a midlife crisis or family member dying, that there was some personal kinds of emergency that shook up the whole way of being that they had had that forced, like a reevaluation of who they are, why they are how they are, that then led to a fundamentally new path, it was more aligned with their purpose. And so that happens, right. And when we look at all of the major issues facing the world today, environmentally socially on so many levels, we have emergency right we have collective emergency that is potentially existential, and Band Aid solutions aren't big enough, and IT solutions will not fix ocean acidification or biodiversity loss, or so many of those level catastrophic and existential issues that the only thing that will fix them are foundational shifts at a species wide level and how we are orient in the universe. And one of the key things is to get that emergency emergency is kind of like, it's kind of like the safety that if we have not consciously proactively evolved in necessary ways and to the way that we have been behaving have led to problems, then hopefully those problems are our, you know, a wake up call a smack to the change, but we don't have to be bound to that being the primary way we evolve forever. As soon as, as soon as we stop identifying primarily as nouns. And we start identifying as verbs we start identifying as dynamic, the comings and, and processes of evolving and blossoming, then, as we identify that there's this evolutionary process that creates more order of complexity that has brought about biology and mammals and us and that with that more orderly complexity comes new emergent properties and capabilities, we can actually kind of identify as Not only the result of evolutionary process, but in a meaningful way that that the evolutionary process brought us about as a species with abstraction that can then contemplate evolution, so that the evolutionary process will walk up to itself in us where we can now think about the future. Understand how evolution as a set of processes is increasing elegant order complexity. 
And we can participate with evolution we can not just kind of be a part of the whole unconsciously governed by genetic programs, but we can become agents for the whole itself. And you know what Barbara Marx Hubbard calls conscious evolution, constant participate with it and once we identify as revolutionaries, we don't need pushed by emergency or catastrophe or pain to evolve. Because we are not sitting here as like complacent things. We are dynamically being drawn by what Tara dysart on called the lure of becoming right by the content process of creating a more beautiful world not because things aren't good enough now not because we're dissatisfied, but because it's the nature of universe to be evolving and becoming, it's our nature to do that. And as soon as we start really shifting into that space of active becoming, we de necessitate, emergency and pain is evolutionary drivers. Yes, you and I have very different tools in our tool bags. But I think that both of us that I mean, that is ultimately when I work with people, I, I want to help them get excited about life. So they're not doing things because somebody says they should, or their doctor says or there's because of exactly what you're saying. And as I was listening to that talk, that was up on Facebook, that's what I could feel that sense of passion, that sense of wanting to move towards something and realizing that we are these dynamic, these ever changing dynamic beings and what happens when we decide to do that consciously versus, you know, just let it Our environment or whatever, the media just shift us who is I'm listening to and I love it. I'm getting excited and I can feel your passion. Are there a few things that need to shift within us culturally or in our society? Like, are there a few linchpins that we could pull? That would give people a greater access or an understanding of our potential?
Yes, and they are at micro and macro levels, macro levels. So, we said earlier that there are these false dichotomies. One classic false dichotomy is kind of, we can see represented right now in political process, in the difference between what has been thought of as the primary philosophic elements of the Democratic or Republican platform is also kind of mirrored in the communist and capitalist platforms. Which can be oversimplified as the, the primary kind of truth of the Republican platform is this agency oriented perspective, hey, I pulled myself up by my bootstraps, even though I came through from a difficult situation. We want other people who are responsible self directing agents pull themselves up by their bootstraps. We don't want social services that make people lazy, independent, and etc. And we want to maximize for for agency, right? And the collective is the result of all of the individual human behavior. So if we, you know, this isn't what capitalism would say. 
Similarly, if we maximize individual freedom and individual incentive will have the best collective possible, because Eclipse is made up by individuals. So that's that side of the story. Then the other side of the story, which in various ways, both the democratic and I'm not saying that any current candidates represent these well, but the democratic platform, and in a bigger way the communist platform is held as, hey, but wait, the individuals are actually being conditioned by the environments that they are born into and raised it. And that we see very clear statistical correlations between if someone is born in poverty grows up in situations of low education, what they are likely to achieve, experienced their statistical likelihood for crime for etc. And even though there are a few cases where someone pulled themselves up by their bootstraps their statistical outliers, so since the individuals are conditioned by their environment, let's make better environments, collective environments that support all individuals to do better. And so then the question is, will do we want better environments that condition individuals better? Or do we want better individuals that help create better collectives and environments? And the answer is obviously, yes, both. And that these are mutually symbiotic. 
And then again, the idea that there's something dichotomous here, just means we haven't understood the scenario. well enough, can we see if we offer a model for increased agency of the individual likes a libertarian model, right, like the capitalist model, but that doesn't factor for how that individuals agency ends up affecting others are the whole well enough, then we end up leading to a situation of what we you know, so much of what we see in the world, right pathologic destructive competition hoarding of resources requiring more resources being extracted from the earth for less actual abundance, you know, continuing enmity, etc, and the tragedy of the commons. Similar, though, if we try to optimize for the collective in a way that squishes, the agency of the individual, then we end up getting dissent and either the breakdown of those systems like as happened with communists attempts, or the enforcement of those systems authoritarian which neither of those are good. So the question is how do we optimize for people's own a gigantic desire to evolve and express and self actualize? And their communal desire to be part of larger holes and contribute to and take care of them? And the truth is, if let's say we look at a human body, the liver isn't trying to get ahead at the expense of the kidneys, and vice versa. In fact, they all need each other because it's a it's a very closely interconnected system. And so they all work very symbiotically when we realize that our planet is this tiny little fragile organic spaceship in this vast cosmic so far to us on in habitable space, and we are all on that spaceship together and and there's really no room for inviting right there's really no room for there's no place called away that we can put our trash there's no buddy called others that we can advantage ourselves that the expensive when we get how profoundly interconnected we are. Our own best self actualization. And the best support of the whole will actually be identical if we factor all the cause and effect loops. So we need to really get that at the level of our own consciousness and our own worldview and at the level of our macro economic systems and our infrastructure. So imagine if we had a macro economic system, where it wasn't that I could confer a lot of material advantage by cutting down trees and killing whales, because as soon as I kill that whale, it's a million dollars worth of whale meat on my, on my fishing boat, we're leaving it alive, it's worth nothing, because the balance sheet of the commons isn't counted, right? That economic model leads to massive biodiversity loss, ocean acidification, all the problems that we see. Imagine if we had an economic system, where the incentive of every individual was perfectly aligned with the well being of every other individual and of the commons, and so people could take incentive could move for But the collective is being advanced and move forward. And everyone's individual access to all of the collective Commonwealth is also growing. So that's an example of that the macro shifts that we need to make. And at a micro level, making sure that our own worldview is we noticed where we start to fall into thinking that we can advantage ourselves at the expense of someone else or advantage other people by sacrificing ourselves and get get over the false dichotomy and look at how we can become more Omni considerate more on the positive through better strategy.

Angelo 35:39  
Well, we only have a few minutes left and so I think feel that this segues nicely into your the newest thing you're working on which is neuro hacker and I find this very fascinating is somebody who does a lot of work in mind body stuff. Tell my listeners a little bit about what neuro hacker is and And why you felt it to be necessary at this time.

Daniel 36:05  
So when we're looking at how to bring about better global civilization, and not through imposition, but a self evolving, self governing, emergent global civilization, then we look at what are all of the things that end up influencing human experience and human behavior? And what are all the things that lead to poor human experience unnecessary kinds of suffering, and that lead to poor human behavior, unnecessary suffering induced and others via our behavior? And what leads to the opposite of those and what can we do to maximally influence move in the right direction? And again, this is not control. This is recognizing we're being we're being conditioned by our environment all the time anyways, how can we be more thoughtful about that to do a better job of it? And when we look at all the categories of things that influence human experience, human behavior, we see that there's, there's ways that the physical environment and world around us does, right? The infrastructure itself and the built world does. And so the whole field of environmental psychology, there's a lot and how do we rebuild the physical world to both be not only better for the planet, but to affect and condition the humans within it better. And by condition. I mean, if you have a world where to get energy, you the energy came through cold, and you really have no options other than that available to you, and to not have access to energy ends up leading to just, you know, no, no capability to do the things you want to in the system, then you have to end the rationalizing, participating with something that you know, is causing inexorable suffering somewhere else. 
So infrastructure itself, conditions a certain aspect of empathy out of everyone, right, the way that we currently do if we had a renewable infrastructure, it could condition totally different things and people. So infrastructure is an area that affects human experience and behavior, our social systems, economics, governance, law, language, all those other things we work with their, our worldview does our definition of success or definition of self other meaning, right, which we've been talking about for biology also does. And when we look at things like anxiety, or depression or brain fog or meaninglessness, there are contributors to those in all of these categories. But specifically at the level of individuals, there's obviously psychologic trauma ideas, beliefs that we can deal with through psychotherapy through personal development methodologies that are important that address what we kind of think of as the software side but there's also hardware predispositions when we when we look at any particular kind of neuro psychiatric issue, we can see a number of neural chemical neuro endocrine, gut brain access neuro structural correlates, and actually identify some of those correlates has causal to some of those structures. And so some of that can be affected through mind brain interface, right? things that you've looked at were shifting mental patterns shifts physical patterns, but it goes both ways shifting physical patterns, and everyone who started sleeping better, and exercising more and eating better has had an experience of shifting physiology in ways that affect their mood, how much kindness is available to them, everyone's felt really sick or had hormones that are balances felt the opposite. And so we created neuro hacker collective to work on understanding how to balance and optimize the human physiology, the neurology and the associated physiology to support more optimized human experience and human capability. So this is everything from increasing cognitive capability right memory focus intelligence complex thinking to Increasing empathy increasing the kind of neurologic pathways that meditative non symbolic experience is mediated across. And so we have one technology that if you go to the website, neuro hacker.com, you'll see is currently available. We have many, many more in process. Our goal is to actually have all that is meaningful in the space of neuro technology, vetted, curated, synthesize, and then personalized so that the very best tools for working on whatever it is that one is wanting to work on are available to them, and that there's there is specific guidance capable. So that's what we're working towards with that project.

Angelo 40:42  
That is so fascinating when I was looking over the website, and would you describe it as a nutraceutical? Some of the products that you have that have been specially formulated to do like you said, the cognitive enhancements, those just that looks incredibly fascinating to me and I'm very excited to try.

Daniel 41:03  
The product that you see on the website now is called quality and it is a it is a nutraceutical. It is a no tropic which means cognitive enhancing supplement. We are not limited to nutraceuticals we're working on technology in the transcranial stimulation space and eg neurofeedback and basically all technology areas that we believe to be fundamentally up regulating of human capacity without any kind of meaningful side effects. That's our criteria. But we started in nutraceuticals, and started in cognitive enhancement for a number of reasons. It's an area that can produce a tremendous amount of positive shift for lots of people. And that is more familiar, right taking a pill is, is an easier step for many people then getting into devices for transcranial stimulation that are more foreign. So if you as you continue to stay tuned, you'll see more and more Different kinds of technologies becoming available. But the first product quality, our goal was, especially seeing how much demand for productivity The world has and how much distraction and kind of damage to people's focus and attention there is, and how much the world is turned to, you know, Red Bull and energy drinks and off label, you know, Adderall as a smart drug. And you know, so many things like that. We wanted to see if we could meet the needs that people are trying to meet with that in terms of increased creative, productive flow capabilities. Without the negative side effects and even with lasting positive benefits where we're, rather than overriding someone's regulatory system, we're working on supporting the robustness of the regulatory system, so that instead of creating dependence, we actually create lasting positive effects after someone stop using this. That was our goal. And we've been, you know, we're continuing research and development but We are very happy with what we've been able to affect two people so far.

Angelo 43:04  
Yes, well, I'm very interested and I will definitely be seeing what's next because I just obviously this show I started the show to talk about human potential and I believe that there's many arenas where human potential can be accessed and activated within each other and it I do, I do think that there is this this definitely this space for this blending of technology in our biological, you know, creating an interface between that I also think that there's also space for you know, straight up meditation and spiritual rest and psychedelics. I've done quite a bit of that as well. But um, I just want to thank you so much. So at this point in the show, I just want to leave you the opportunity to share with people how they can find your website shows, social media, anything you'd like to leave my listeners with at this time.

Daniel 44:00  
Yeah, just a last thought on one other dichotomy I'd love for people to see if they're asked is the idea that nature and technology are somehow opposed? They have been. Because we have developed technology without really understanding how nature works without understanding self organization and complexity well, which is led to externalities. But that's not innate to technology, nature evolved us and evolved our capacity to evolve things which, you know, our tools are extensions of the evolutionary process. So the future is going to be both very nature integrated and very high tech world where our technologies an expression of the natural world, with the self organization and design complexity of the natural world. And so whether we are meditating or whether we're using no tropics, I don't see those as fundamentally different kinds of things. I see those as methodologies, processes technologies, of understanding how to navigate the human experience better using Lies and all that's available to us so just a just a closing thought people can see more of what we're doing with neuro hacker at neuro hacker.com if people want to, you know just see kind of what I'm up to following me on Facebook is an easy way.

Angelo 45:16  
Well, Daniel, any thank you so much for being on the show today? You gave me a lot to think about and, yeah, I would love to have you on anytime and if you need any test subjects for your for your new technology, let me know. Well, I'm coming up next week we have Lisa knock and She's the author of six award winning books on and we'll be talking about the cultural and spiritual factors that lead to women's bodies issues eating disorders and ageism. If you want to know more about myself Angela back you can go to Angelo vet calm and if you want to know more about our project here at conversations from the brink or more about entanglement radio, you can go to conversations from the brink calm. That's our show for you today. Thank you so much. for tuning in, and we'll be back next week.