Nadia 4:25
When you're ready, go ahead and open your eyes. So we've got three absolutely extraordinary panelists here today to talk about the future of humanity and systems thinking. And one of the things that many participants say coming out of hive, this is my ninth hive now is that they leave more clarity on the work that they want to do. And a reframe on their vision for what the future of humanity and the world can look like. And their work can look like And it Hi here, we're always prototyping. And a couple of months ago, we came up with this idea to try panel on the afternoon of today, around the world and the future of the world. We're brainstorming for it, it came with a few dream speakers. And these dream speakers are all on stage with us here today. And these speakers are not only some of the most brilliant thinkers I've ever met, who have visions for the future of the world. But they're also some of the most humble and heartfelt leaders that I've ever met as well. They're really thoughtful in the way in which they do their work and lead their lives. So I'm really excited and honored to have them here today. And I'll start by introducing them and then I'll ask questions for a while and then at the end, you guys will have a chance to ask questions as well. 
So I'll start by introducing Tom, he's worked at Google X and Yahoo. In fact, your ex and now we're going to put a tech thinking. And Tom also is written children's books is a comic strip author is a very talented musician. Jennifer here, has been an executive of biotech companies and environmental companies and helps bring more than 40 technologies into market. She's a coach, a visionary. And she and her partner Brian, who's in the audience, run a project together called evolving love, which is all about changing the future of partnership and romantic partnership. And she's also really involved with community and community living here in the Bay Area and beyond, and runs a camp at Burning Man Called mystic, which I had the pleasure of camping with this year and it was amazing. I see quite a few mystics in the room here. And yeah, yeah. And Daniel is the co founder of or the founder, I should say of emergence project, which is a think tank thinking about what the future of Civilization could look like thinking about infrastructure, people's worldviews, basically everything and how they all interrelate. And he's also the co founder of neuro hacker, which is thinking about the future of human physiology, physiology and brains and how to enhance our cognitive function and the way that we relate and act as people. And so that I want to start by asking each of you to share an abbreviated version of some of your crucible moments and some of the key decision points in your life when you knew when you felt called or compelled to make a difference, what has led you to what you're working on now and the system that you're working on now. 

Daniel 8:00
Also Jennifer was co founder of emergence project with me, we got to work very deeply. Really honored to be here with all these people, obviously, crucible moments, I first just really loved that hive started with crucible moments last night because having everyone start with vulnerability and then vulnerability, connected to their purpose, just such a neat way of doing it and I'm happy they were starting that way. So for me, it was a series of things where my own events that cause suffering and exposure to other suffering in the world sensitize me to kind of the magnitude and the extent and nature of suffering and then that kind of forced, how do we solve this. So I was fortunate to be homeschooled growing up, so I got to be exposed to kind of unusual things early on because of that. So these I'll share a particular small set of crucible moments that first one I was maybe eight or nine years old saw a slaughter truck, factory farm, cattle slaughter truck. And looking and I saw cows in a, in a condition that I had never seen animals in. And it was like really existentially devastating for me because it was so unbelievably grotesque, which led me to then go to a factory farm, and just dive down the rabbit hole of what was happening. And I grew up like so many people, someone who loved animals, but also just didn't connect to what our relationship to animals is at scale. And that got me into activism, which started in animal rights, and then environmental work, and then social justice work and it ended up turning out for me that the suffering of any sentient thing didn't bother me more or less than any other thing. So whether we were talking about factory farms or species extinction or whaling or extreme poverty or they were just so completely unacceptable. That is just Like there was no way through for me in life, there wasn't a way through for all of them. And so this was the beginning of existential devastation that led to of course, purpose, as it often does for people, where the thing that happened for me was like, Is there a model of success for my life? That isn't success for all of them? That's okay with me? And the answer is, of course, no, right? Because if I'm going to be excited about my own success with, with that degree of intensity of suffering through so much of the world, I have to be at least partially psychopathic, I have to be able to disconnect from the experience of other sentient things so much, and any success model that was based on psychopathy wasn't compelling for me. 
And so then, that found my own life path and success definition with success for everybody, right. Then as I got deeply into activism, I got to see how profoundly interconnected the different areas of problems in the world One of the early experiences was working on a elephant poaching project. And this solution was getting bigger fences around the preserves, and harsher sentencing for poachers. But after a tremendous amount of work, and that succeeded in those elephants were being poached, the underlying poverty of the poachers wasn't addressed the mindset of people towards animals, the underlying macro economic system that created poverty, the macro economic system by which the animals were worth something that and they weren't worth anything to live on anyone's balance sheet led the same groups of people to start hunting the white rhino in the mountain gorilla. And I saw that we just moved problems. And that got me into systems analysis and doing deep systems analysis on how all the various issues were connected. And it was actually became clear that the deepest, biggest existential issues were so profoundly interconnected. They weren't solvable in isolation. And then not only were they not only were they interconnected, but they had a lot of the same underlying structural drivers. And so the that the process crucible moment for me was, wow, there's profound. There's profound enough suffering that just because we put it somewhere else, and don't look at it like this, it's not okay, just continue to not look at it. And I got to look at it enough that I could never stop thinking about it. And then, and so we need to address a lot of things and with solutions that are fundamentally different in approach than almost anything currently happening. 
And so that really directed a life of course, for me of saying, what are the deepest underlying causes? Why all these things are happening? What would it take to shift those causes? And what is a blueprint or set of criteria for blueprints for future of civilization? That obsoletes the foundational causes of unnecessary human suffering kind of it at scale? So it's awesome because my like, completely depressed, suicidal existential anks growing up with nightmares ended up leaving, of course, to my recognition that that was that was a tiny degree of suffering compared to what so many are in and how do we solve that. So that's a crucible story.

Jennifer 13:00
Yeah, I had a really beautiful group where we got to share some of these moments and this amazing jet coming by is just filling our ears. So just excuse the noise. Yes, my crucible moment, you know, I had an experience that we all have growing up, which is that we learn from a very young developmental age that when we do something, when we try to manipulate reality in response, and when you have that experience, you can begin to understand that you are the architect of your universe. And a favorite spiritual teacher said to me one day that I just loved, which is that you are the universe that you formerly thought you were inside of the thing that you thought was just affecting you, you're actually actively participating and creating it. And so, at a very precocious age, maybe many of you can relate. I decided I'm going to leave the world better than I found it. And I started saying that when I was really young little girl way younger, my could have actually taken any action. But it drove me into environmental science. And I kept that passion of I want to leave the world better than I found. Like, how many of you kind of feel that in your bones? Right? Yeah. And so fast forward, I met the man of my dreams. I met Brian Franklin, who's in this audience, my husband, my partner in crime my partner in life and in love. And I had been a voracious, taking in like I was just voraciously taking in spiritual teachings and ideas from the greatest thinkers of our time. The greatest spiritual teachers of our time and seeking knowledge. And on a very, very fateful day, we went to this breakfast and it was one of our first dates and he looks me in the eye. right through me It says, Jennifer, you've been a seeker your whole life. And what I see in you is a woman that can become a deliver.
And in that moment, this man looking me in the eye, believing in me to be one of those speakers, teachers that I had idolizing my whole life, just seeking, I realized that what was next for me was to stand up and be a deliverer, not just a seeker. And what occurred for me in that moment with this beautiful and this was one of the most enlightened man I've ever met in my life, looking me in the eye and telling me this was that like, so Many of us I was in my white ivory tower, waiting for someone else. Right? Thinking that I would eventually derive my strength if I read another book or went to another teacher or sought another course, and realized that the strength and courage that I needed to derive would not occur until my feet touch the ground, which meant that I needed to actually begin to deliver some of this work in the world. And for me, his belief in me his love of me, his championship of me, was a crucible moment and I began to teach and lead with him from that day forward. In fact, he came to me one day after nine months of resistance going, No, no, no, this is your job. This is not my job. I'm a scientist. I don't belong in front of stages doing this. Who's going to listen to me? Right, apparently and he looks me in the eye. With not a shred of shrinking back, he says, Jennifer, I refuse to stand up here one more day and do one more course with you in the back of the room wilting, handing out handouts. Because every word coming from my mouth is sourced from us and from you. I am shutting down the company and I will not teach anymore without you here because your voice is needed. So it wasn't just. I believe in you to become this, I refuse to go another day without you doing this and that putting it on the line changed me for ever and I am so grateful to this man into the power of love in our lives to do that for us.

Tom 18:00
Alright, that's pretty intense. My thing is just like maybe a little more gritty and practical. Like, that was amazing. I'm like a normal person. So like, okay, immigrant parents came to the US, basically couldn't read or write any language, I was illiterate until I was seven. So I only thought pictures and numbers, which is not really a problem, because there's still a lot of thinking you can do but kind of a problem because you can't make any friends which is fine. That's fine. spends a bunch of time instead like trying to understand the universe. So like, I was very excited about life as a kid like being in nature and studying the stars and got pretty far all those things and just like loved a lot about life, then around like age 11 or 12. I started to like work recognize what the world was actually like. So I grew up a lot in the 80s. So there's like this thing called mutually assured destruction, where we have this thing where it's like our policy to like not get killed is will kill all of them to that was like the official policy of both the USSR and the USA around the use of nuclear weapons. It's like, Don't worry, we'll kill all of them. If they try to kill us. Don't worry, that's that's actually our strategy. And I was like, What is this? What adults do this is crazy. And then like not that long afterwards, there's this thing called the savings and loan scandal. And like it was a major economic collapse, not that different than 2008. 
In retrospect, we do this all the time. But at the time, I was like, How crazy is this? Because like a little number change somewhere and there's literally a person jumping off of a 50 story building, because it's over for them because a number changed. And I was like, we made this world. We made a world where a number changes on a spreadsheet and you jump out of business. We made a world where our strategy to go deal with peace is that we can bomb every single one of your cities three times over. That's like what we created. And, and this, like, I was realizing this around age 11 or 12. And I didn't have that feeling like, Oh my gosh, like, I don't just make this all better. My my hope was like, let me just get this through this thing without making the world any worse, because this is crazy fucked up. Like, I don't even want to be near this stuff. The actual action I took was like, at age 15, I started a punk rock band. It was just like, let's tear it all down. It's tearing all that. And I was in like this very, like, ankle existential it's all fucked up. Let me just try to get through it mode for quite a while actually. And it wasn't until I was maybe like 18 or so that I heard this phrase and I can't find the source. I've tried look for it since I don't know maybe you just like I made it up for myself, but I feel like so Somebody told me this, but the phrase was a cynic is just a frustrated idealist.
And I was like, initially, I was like, whatever. That's a weird thing to think. And then like, you know, it's one of those things that stuck with me. And then as I kept coming back to I was like, maybe, well, maybe that's what it is. Like, I'm so cynical about the world because I'm actually frustrated idealist like maybe there is ideals that I have. Maybe there is something that matters beyond just getting through this without making it any worse. And you know, that started like a very long journey. And that's not all these different parts of it. And none of it involves like, all this amazing stuff that you guys did. That's crazy. But just running very quickly through it. So that was all happening. I started to try to do some stuff, but I sucked at it, basically. And then when I was 29, I almost died. So that was the whole thing, but maybe we'll skip it. I don't know. It's kind of interesting. I almost died. Basically what happened was I was like, I was like, so good at like doing stuff in the existing systems, like once I actually put my mind to it, and I stopped being a cynic, I could actually get a lot of stuff done. So it's getting a lot of stuff done, but so good at getting stuff done. And I, my overall strategy for dealing with stress was like, I will internalize it and just work harder. Like my immigrant parents basically taught me to just work harder. And I would, and not only would I do do that for myself, which worked fine as a strategy. As I got a team and became an executive and had more and more people reporting to me, I absorbed all of their stress too, because I was like, I don't want you to stress. Let me take that on. I want you to stress. Let me take that, and I would just work that much harder, that much harder, that much harder. At some point before age 30 almost did not make age 30. I had internalized so much of that stress that basically my gi system stopped functioning just burst open, and I lost 40% of my blood in 30 minutes. And that's the thing that can happen. And in the emergency room, they gave me four simultaneous blood transfusions. Because it turns out that when you're losing blood that fast, they can't just give you one you'll still die. They need to give you four at once, otherwise you will die. So he gave me a four at once. And it the bleeding didn't stop quite yet. So they gave me another four, one simultaneous, you know, simultaneously again after that, and a couple more after that, but eventually it stabilized and I did not die. Nice job. And I woke up the next morning Hey, cool, some people by so woke up the next morning with two important realizations One of them was that human bodies mostly liquid and that liquid is mostly blood. Basically all my blood got replaced. So I mostly somebody else today, not myself. And then like, you know, you know, and the other realization was that I was only alive because of the generosity of like, eight or more other people that have never been to mean. And it's just like, you sit back and you like recognize, you know, There's a sense like, Okay, so here's the thing, like people love, like, take on more stress do it, you can do it if you push harder, work harder. Absolutely. And I'm not saying that hard work is not a big deal. It's not important do it. But what I was also living at the age of 29 was the belief that I would somehow need to shoulder all myself and to like literally wake up in the blood and the body of eight other people have recognized how connected and supported I was by every other human being on Earth. That I was like, No, this is not me. This is everybody that Yeah, I'm going to fucking work hard when fucking working hard because all of you are in me and I'm in all of you. Like let's do this. And when I got back to do my work because I was an up and coming executive that changed everything about how I lead and it took like years and years for to to actually fully propagate and do all the experiments and like find a spot where I'm like, this is how I want leadership to feel and but like eventually got there with all That? Yeah, I don't know, there's more crucible moments, but whatever. Like, that's probably enough.

Nadia 25:12  
And that leads nicely into something that Jennifer, you're really passionate about, which is the interconnectedness between all of us. And I'd love to hear more about the work that you do with Brian, and with couples to think about the future of love and the future of partnership, and how that bleeds into your work with communities like catalystic at Burning Man and teams and leadership, and kind of future of communities in general. So if you could speak a bit of an individual connection level, and then what you see as the future of partnership and community and what your vision is for that.

Jennifer 25:45  
It's a good question. Um, so I was really struck, inspired really by a community that lives in tomorrow and hearing this phrase, really, really like like a ton of bricks filling me in this moment, which is that we cannot live in a world without war until we heal the war between the sexes. So if we take that on for a moment where we take the realm of love, which we think of as the personal, the individual, like how do I get more love in my life and sex and affection and safety, all of those are very important things but if we realize that love is also political, right at a larger scale, because what happens is if we live in a world where we are at war with ourselves, which is the majority of us, we are divided the masculine and feminine and us with its different poles it's different desires is different value sets are at war inside of us. We live in a holographic universe it's my belief we mirror it, we holographic represent that systemically. So then I'm at war inside myself and I'm at war with my partner and I'm creating conflict and Then. And then I recreate those kind of worrying systems in my economic policies, and then I create that in my political systems, and then they're at war. And then I recreate that in my culture. Because it's all connected. 
I mean, we're going to talk a lot or and we're already talking about systems understanding of this reality. And so when I started to go into, like, what can I do? What's the trim tab to use like a Buckminster Fuller term term and a trim tab is kind of like a fancy way of saying like, what is the, the the, the leverage point that if you push in a small with a small amount of effort here, it yields an enormous result on the other side. When I when I dived into that question, because I did want to leave the world better than I found it Damn it, right. I wanted to do that as that precocious child was living into the stream. And I realize that one of the things that all of us in this room can Do you know you all have your unique ways that you're going to give your gifts to the world to really shake it into the future. But there's one thing we can all do, which is heal the war inside ourselves. Right, which is evolved the way that we love. Right? And when we do that, it's my belief like how does that relate to the future? It's my belief that all of our bad decision making is sourced from fear. And when we're driven by separation and division, and more and conflict inside ourselves, than what it occurs to us to build an architect, what it occurs to us to create in our social systems, when it occurs, for us to create all around us is something that is a protective mechanism against the fear of other. So I think that like the best thing I can do for all of you, the best thing I can do for me is to heal the divide.
And we can all do that, you're gonna have your unique way of doing that in your life. But we can all work on that as a collective culture. And then guess what, we all have the same role, even when we participate in it differently, which is that we are all culture shifters. And I realized that I could be a culture shifter, because to interact with me was to feel someone who was more and more integrated, who was more and more connected, and who is more and more expanded rather than more and more separated, disconnected and disintegrated. And so my work in the world is to heal that divide. And that is my trim tab. That's one of the trim tabs that I work on. And then the last thing I want to say about that because she threw in community, she asked me a really long, big question. All right, yeah. Yeah. Which is not Han Buddhist. Beautiful man said that the next Buddha is a saga, which to me means the next phase of our enlightenment as a culture is not just our individually going inside and being enlightened, yes, that's a piece please do that. But that the next evolutionary movement that we actually need is a collective one is a community movement where we actually are incapable of healing ourselves fully, until we realize the power of community have tried to help create the atmosphere that creates transparency, truth, trust, because that is what will heal the fear that is making all of the poor decision making that is leading to the the systems that all need to change. And so I see community and community building as one of the richest places for us to create the atmosphere by which we can heal love, heal the divide, feel less, less scared and less afraid. And then make good decisions about the world we want to create. 

Nadia 31:10
Jennifer, since we've got a community in the room here and for the next couple of days. Do you have any exercises or ideas for ways that people can play with healing this this weekend and experimenting with it this weekend?

Jennifer 31:28  
Let me see how can I do this. I'm going to try to give this as quickly as possible. Draw yourself if you have a notebook if you feel like it, you can also just listen a square with four boxes on the top or on the bottom side going down you go masculine and then feminine. Right now select the top feminine at the bottom. Either way, you can switch them. I'm not getting priority either way. And then across the top line, I want you to write active and passive so you Should have masculine feminine Active Passive top corner, the active masculine. This is the force of penetration, right? You penetrate the space with who you are and what you value. No room goes left unscathed. We feel you we know you when you're present and in the room, this is the act of masculine. You can practice this form and integrate this as part of who you are. Next box over passive masculine holding space. This is another form of power. This is another form of interacting in a community. If all you did was penetrate and fill the space and you never left room for anyone. We've all met those people. They don't stop talking. If you capsule space, you cannot leave room for another person's beauty and brilliance. And this is like a strong safe container like hive is created for us to be our most brilliant selves. Quiet. 
Listen, maybe It's safe, make it make their brilliance be what it's about instead of you. That's the passive masculine form of power and influence and a community. bottom two squares, let's get into the feminine. So I'm gonna go backwards. So the passive feminine. So the active feminine is penetrating the space with your energy so that you are felt. The passive feminine is an equally powerful force, which is seducing attracting, it's the magnetic pole. It's seducing you from a million miles, you just have to occupy the same space that that person is in because what they are saying is so compelling and draws you in. You are seduced, you are love itself. And that's another form of power of interactions to integrate passive feminine. Helen of Troy launched 1000 ships with her eyes. Martin Luther King with his speeches had hundreds of thousands, millions of people rallied to His cause you're a maverick, if you can't rally and attract and draw people in this powerful last quadrant, the active feminine. Johnson is here. Now, that's a powerful force that's penetrating my space. I don't know about yours. The active feminine drops the agenda that the active masculine holds. This is what we're doing. This is my agenda. This is what we're going this is what we want you to do, and instead listens, is completely spontaneous and intuitive and creative. She feels the field, which includes not just herself and her desires, but the entire room. So imagine for a moment if you could expand your consciousness to include the entire ecosystem, but especially the one in this room, and you spoke from the field. And you said, This is what I feel the field needs. So that practice those four, four faces, any community environment, where you bring not the one that's comfortable, but the one that's most needed, where agility and grace and your movement between those four is the goal with a joy and grace, I penetrate and tell you who I am and what I value. And then I draw you in and draw you to a cause that's, that's important. And then I hold space for your brilliance to come out. And then I listened to the field and say, This is what's needed. And if with agility and grace, you can bring that to your community. This to me is a practice of integration.

Daniel 35:50  
Isn't it so fun to watch her embody each of the forces as she's describing it?

Nadia 36:04  
Daniel, I'm going to turn back to you now. And I'd be curious for you to share a bit about your work with neuro hacker, and for what you see as the future of nootropics and different technologies that will interrelate with people in the human body, and how will be able to enhance our systems over time, and what that will look like. 

Daniel 36:30  
Okay, it's a very different direction, happy to do that. Just kind of piggybacking on with Jennifer shirts, and then it ties it all together as we can think of anything as a relationship or as a complex set of relationships of other things where the relationships actually add net novelty, we're just understanding the parts in isolation isn't enough, right? There's synergy there's emergent behaviors of the holes that you don't, you don't predict just by the baby parts taken separately. That's the name of this talk has a vision in the future and the systems right that's kind of a core principle of systems theory and Another way of saying it is that everything is an interrelationship of other things. It's a synergistically actuate actuated emergent property of other things. fritjof Capra, the great systems thinker has this really beautiful way of saying and he says, you think of a molecule as a complex relationship between the atoms that make it up, and then that between the fundamental particles and make it up and you can keep going to where there isn't actually a fundamental atomistic thing that we can think of universe as an interrelationship of enter relationships of dot dot dot. Einstein said it's an optical delusion of consciousness to believe that there are separate things. When in reality, there's this one can't even call it a thing. As this one reality we call it universe. Tom spoke to that right? He spoke to the he's actually eight or nine or 10 other people. And even if it wasn't for the blood transfusion, he talks about how his breath and everything else makes some other people and not yet all of us are millions, all the time. 
And not just his body, but his thoughts came from other people his language, right? Jennifer's talking about this in actual human relationships, but we can really think of, we can think of economics as a process of mediating relationships. And you can have macro economic structures that do that better and worse terms of certain properties, we can think of everything that way. And so we've kind of taken, I've taken the kind of complex systems whole systems approach to problems that didn't have adequate solutions that I cared about in different areas like social systems and environment and medicine. Because when you have very complex systems, we have a lot of interacting parts and complex causal models, then understanding one part and kind of changing that doesn't end up being adequate most of the time, like Tom story about some motivation and that health crucible. I also had a diagnosis of incurable autoimmune neurodegenerative illness and it was Both incurable in the allopathic space and integrative medicine space. And so it's like, cool that the only way to figure this one out is to actually really model what's happening, which tissues are being damaged by which chemicals, what cascades can cause those and it required. One of the things that I found was I was like, all right, for these diseases, there's some statistical correlation of this disease with with this possible cause. But it's not perfect. It's not one for one, right? 
But there's also some statistical correlation with this cause and this cause and that was true over several thousand distinct causes, some toxins, some genetics, some nutritional deficiencies and pathogens and structural issues. And so had to say, all right, well, maybe a disease like Ms or like ALS, or it's not one thing, it's a set of symptoms that can have many different causal pathways that come in and maybe it's not even the same thing in any two people, right? Maybe it is a kind of causal cascade that some number of things can trigger. And so I started kind of looking at how do we how do we inventory how do we ontology is that special And then do the differential diagnosis to see which of those things are happening and how to reverse it. And so that rabbit hole ended up leading to very fortunately me figuring out how to reverse those illnesses and myself and then in the process, of course, everyone who was around me that also had incurable illness. We went through those and that was in autoimmunity and nerve dejenne and cancers and specifically chronic complex disease, not acute disease for which allopathic medicine is usually fairly good because it's got kind of specific causation. And so then that led to really diving into our their fun, fundamentally better solutions for all disease and illness. And is it likely that they are not the same solution for different people so really diving into personalized medicine, and that's not just in psycho neuro space. We're kind of focusing in psycho neuro to begin with because we've got, you know, insights that we can work with their But then that expands to nerdy Jen and then expands to medicine and then human wellness kind of holistically. And then beyond human wellness, right social systems, and it's the same model apply that scale. But so we started to look at for any particular pathology, what are all of the kind of causes that could bring that about? How do we identify what the specific combinatoric of potentially and dimensional partial causes are? And then how do we identify specific therapeutic protocols you think about a clinical trial is one intervention across a whole range of people? And we're trying to see Do we have some statistical significance beyond the placebo? But if I wanted to personalized medicine or I'm looking at your genome, your metabolism, your specific chemistry, your causes, I need to optimize for n equals one, we need a totally different methodology, different epistemology. So developing that methodology epistemology. 
So one of the things that that led to is we have a neuro technology company that is working on the whole space right now. Kind of neuro psychiatric things so anxiety, depression, mental illness, cognitive issues and both on the kind of enhancement side, can we fundamentally enhance human cognitive capability? Can we fundamentally enhance psycho emotional capability? When you think about empathy runs on specific neural networks mediated by neuro chemistry media by many complex physiologic processes? Can we up regulate those physiologic processes? Can we up regulate the physiology that's involved in impulse control and complex thinking? And the answer into being very happily, yes. And then the enhancement. Also, that same model can address the disease model side of where we're working and everything from kind of transcranial stimulation technologies to genomic technologies to kind of biochem technologies, but beyond like the personal driver and think about how much suffering we can alleviate at the human level, like if you've ever had mental illness in your family or illness, of any kind You've seen again, you've seen people experiencing this and experienced it yourself and then think about the scale at which it happens. These are some of the great issues we want to address, right? But not just human suffering for how do we make someone's quality of life better, but when you start to realize that most of the things we want to change in the world actually involve changing human behavior that's causing those problems and nor were different human behavior could bring about the solution to those problems. Our patterns of behavior partly physiologically influenced, yes, not totally physiologically influenced, there's mimetic thought, belief system influences, there are social structure influences, we have to address all of those. So that biology piece is necessary but not sufficient for addressing some of the elements that condition human behavior. But the idea of can we actually address the physiology of psychopathy, right? 
That's a big deal we can and the answer, again, surprisingly, ends up being out. There's a lot that we can do about that. So then imagine a world in which Everyone's bio bio physiology is predisposed for very high level of empathy, for very high level of emotional intelligence or cognitive capacity to seek with nuance and complex complexity, then of course, you have to actually have the soft person, you have to have training, education mimetics, but you have to actually have the hardware to process those things. So that's why we're addressing this, you know, particular company. 

Nadia 44:30
Thank you. And I've had a few friends who've tried qualla, which is their first product. And these are friends I've known for years and seeing them after taking it for a week, I'm saying you're more grounded and present and happy and empathetic than I've ever seen you, what happened? They said, Oh, I tried Kalia. Do you notice the difference? 

Jennifer 44:45
So it's a bit like the movie limitless. Have you all seen the movie limitless? So this if you haven't tried it, it's an incredible experience. I am. I love it. 

Daniel 44:55
So don't tell anybody outside of this room, but this is there's a Trojan horse actually, right? We wanted to see there not that many people searching, how do I increase my empathy online, but there are a lot of people looking for competitive advantage. And we see the kind of Red Bull off-label Adderall, etc markets and we wanted to see what can we enhance people's cognitive capability in a way that provides immediate, noticeable benefit. So instead of using off label Adderall, they could use this that doesn't have the side effects that actually has long term positives, these every one of these criteria and how hard this is. And that, in addition to improving cognitive metrics, also improve psycho emotional metrics. But we don't even have to talk about that. Right? That could just be like a cool side effect. And we started with bringing that product into market before some of the other ones because it ends up being that regulatory processes in the space are complex and so angry.

Nadia 45:58  
Yeah, so Tom, maybe I'll turn it over to you now. And I'd be curious. Daniel is just talking about individual human physiology. And I'm curious, you thought a lot about as everyone on this panel has about different systems and structures and kind of the future of entrepreneurship, and business and how we can transform business to transform the planet. Can you speak a bit to your vision?

Tom 46:30
So what's super cool is everybody came to the same conclusion, but like a totally different way. So check this out. So like, I went into the world, and Okay, well, I'm good at inventing stuff. So it's 75 patents, I've invented maybe 10 times more stuff than I patented. Pretty good inventing stuff. And it's like really fast and inventing stuff, too. I'm really good at teaching people how to go do those things. So that's all good. So my first thought was like, let me just go out in the world, and I'll like work in these villages. And I'll work with these people in government work with these equal area executives, like will teach them how to go solve these problems real fast, and I would Totally go in there. And I would totally teach them to do it. And when I was like sitting right next to them, they'd be solving the problems. 10 times faster, 100 times faster. They'd be like, this is freaking fantastic. It's amazing. And all this stuff was happening. But then when I would leave them little by little, they would like turn back to normal. And I was like, What is this about right here? It's actually like, we know how to do it. It's not even that we don't even know it's not that we don't know what to do, or that there's no way to do it. It's like, even if I go to you, and show you how to do the thing that you want to do, you don't do it. That's really weird. And I started to recognize that like, there's these outer challenges which are Yes, poverty and, you know, access to clean water and economic inequality and just I can go on and on, there's like, a bunch of them that matter. 
And a bunch of I'm working on it's fine. There's pulled me aside if you want to talk. But actually the main problem is the inner stuff. Basically, there's a realization that we have the world that we do, because we think the way that we do, right, and unless we fix it in here, then it's never going to get fixed out there. So I mean, this is a great example. So I was in the Guatemalan cloud forest with my friend Juan who's driving a pickup truck and we're bouncing around trying to get to this remote village to get them solar power for the first time ever cool. But because of that, we have like all these hours in the jungle because like there's no roads like this is you go like four miles per hour or something even though you're in a truck takes freaking forever to get anywhere. So we have like four or five hours in this truck. And sometime during that bad trip, he's like, Tom, you know, maybe it's too late to create a sustainable planet maybe maybe if we only had is half as many people you know, population wise it's so many I mean, it's not i'm not saying like kill everybody's like, imagine like if the world only had half as many people like maybe we could make a sustainable planet that and like, this just came out of nowhere. I was not even thinking but as soon as he said that, I was like one, we have half as many people in the world 40 years ago. And if we keep thinking the way that we do, it doesn't matter. We could have half as many people today and we would have exactly the same problem. 40 years problems not out there, it's in here. And what you guys just said is exactly that. 
It's just you're coming from like the Okay, well, how do we inspire empathy through, you know, you know, different approaches? How do we heal relationships from the inside out, starting with the relationship with yourself, and I'm basically trying to work on the same thing. I call it the psychological antecedents to global prosperity, whatever, I'm not a marketing person, but that's a very accurate term for what I'm talking about. Can you repeat that a psychological antecedents to global prosperity? How would you need to think in order to have an awesome world that's another way to say it. But like my approach to it is like different than these two other approaches where my approach is like, Well, let me figure out these like, really interesting ways to teach That like stick with people that challenge I consider it most like, more like there's bugs in the operating system of collective consciousness. And like me as like an engineer or programmer is going to debugging. And the way that it will be done is debug is not by overriding lines of code in your brain. But like inserting, like these little procedures, they're like Zen cones that keep on unpacking themselves forever, inside of your brain until you're like, holy crap. So I don't know, I'll just share a couple of super quickly. But that's not even the vision that like I think, not us as a god. So I'll do that super quickly, because that's not the point. So check it out. So one of them is, is knowing as the enemy of learning, and people are like, Oh, wait a second knowing, oh, they are kind of different. Oh, yeah. And actually, when I'm in a state of knowing, and actually I have a whole talk about it, but basically, it says that when you're in a state of knowing it's literally impossible to learn anything that you actually want to improve or Change you need to be in the state of learning about. And I see people constantly in a state of knowing, in fact, what we do on TV is we bring experts on board. And experts are constantly in a state of knowing. Right? 
If you ever wanted anything to be different about the world do not bring a bunch of experts to share their opinions. Not because expertise is not useful. But using your mind in a state of knowing, which is what experts are asked to do, is very toxic to changing anything. Go ahead and bring those same experts but get them into a state of learning. Say, here's the thing that we don't know how to solve together, roll up your sleeves we're solving, right don't ask for their opinions about things that will move everybody into a state of knowing. Another simple one is we built an entire society built off of the the bug that net worth equals human worth. Right like nobody gets on them. When does the actor or actress get on the magazine cover when they have the movie where they make $20 million? Were they a much worse actor or actress six months prior No, they were just as interesting, just as compelling, just as amazing as people. And the moment that their network changes, we think that they're human worth changes. We do not question this very often, every single thing that you've seen in the media, every single thing, like why you talk about some people, not other people is exactly built off of this belief. And the more that you pay attention to this belief, the more that you understand is completely untrue. Right, and the more that you understand, it's not true that the more that you'll construct a life based on the stuff that actually is true, everybody actually matters. And there's a lot of interesting stuff from everybody. And that there is a type of worth that you will receive from everybody if you can just hear them. 
Anyway, that's not the important stuff we're going to get. Okay, the visions, there's all this stuff. So, yes, so I had this whole thing where I like wanted to be a corporate executive, because my whole thought was like, I'll be a corporate executive. I'll be a top executive of Fortune 500 company, and I'll push them over to be 100% sustainable, and that will be like a really good mark. But then like at some point Like when I left my executive job, I was like in the jungles in Hawaii. And I was like, hmm, How good was my goal? So I like whipped out a thing. So I have a spreadsheet in the jungles of why that's me. So then I like started calculating the thing. And I'm like, What if I got that goal? 100%. Right? What if I became the CEO? Not just any executive, the top executive with the largest organization in the world and made it 100% sustainable? What percentage of the global economy would I effect? And it turned out that at that point of time, the largest corporation in the world is Walmart. And I calculated exactly what percentage of the global economy like Walmart directly impacts. And so imagine, that's how much you could make sustainable. The answer is 0.4%. And I was like, I picked the wrong goal. I'm an idiot. And I was like, This is completely ludicrous. We need an entirely different framework for this. So long story short, I like dug in the spreadsheets and my did a good job and calculations for for two days. And at the end of it, I realized that there's really We only have like 17 industries that make up 95% of the global economy. There's only four possible outcomes from them relative to a sustainable future, they either need to grow quickly die quickly grow slowly or die slowly. Right? And you can just mark the industry and say, This is what's going to happen to you in the next 50 years if we're going to have a sustainable planet. 
But not only did I get there, I was like, holy crap, maybe that may not be enough. Because actually, when you go into this stuff, and there's a very long discussion about why that may not be enough, but there is a further realization where it's like, that should not be the goal. The goal should be the following. The goal is that humanity needs to become a net positive to nature. There's no other situation where we survive. So basically, right now, we're fucking up super bad, super hard. Like, like our best plans are like, let's look it up a little bit slower. But then it's like, Okay, well, you don't like destroy the planet in 50 years. You destroy it, and I'm Hundred 50 years Nice job right? Or we think Lois, how about sustainable sustainable is pretty good. But here's the difficulty about sustainable especially when it comes to the economic frame. Things are sustainable, they tend to be like this careful connection of what is works in with the environment. That's part of the environmental sustainability, what works with the market and what works with current technology. The problem with that is technology in the market are constantly changing. So like even if you made a company that was doing stuff totally sustainably right now, you fast forward 20 years when technology market is super different, and your things broken, and every single time that it's broken, even by a little bit. It's a lag period where you're not fully sustainable. So even sustainable is not sustainable because sustainable as defined right now has a type of fragility to it. The net output of humanity needs to be more people that there are we need to add more topsoil per year. The more people that there are the we need to have cleaner water and cleaner air every single year. The more people That there are the more that we need to, like encourage the return of species biodiversity in all the environments that we have any care over, which at this point is the whole earth. So that's kind of what's up. That's enough. We're good.

Jennifer 56:22
And I want to give Daniel some credit for what I'm about to say because, you know, we work together a little bit on the emergence of project and what I love about what you were saying, Thomas is something that I feel like we never question, which is that like the very purpose of our projects, the very purpose of our businesses the very purpose of our lives is to grow and consume and grow and consume some more and grow and consume some more which is absolutely appropriate in an adolescent prepubescent early developmental stage. Like if you look at a biological kind of organism, there is a time when you are growing from like a single Two trillions, and you need to grow and consume in order to develop into the adult phase. And just what I'm hearing and what what what you said and something I want us to look at for a moment, is this developmental phase is just a developmental one. And yet we have arrested ourselves in this phase where we think the purpose of our businesses to grow every year and extract more and more profit. I mean, how many of you have ever questioned whether the purpose of your business each year upon year could be maybe not? How do I make it bigger and have it profit more? Like, that's not something? Most of us, thank God, there's a few of you. It's great. But what I feel like you know, something that Dan and I talked a lot about when we worked together was the need for us to transition out of the growth consumption mindset. Because we have we've done that. We're here. We're beyond that phase. And there's a there's a more mature phase to me which is marked by What he's saying, which is marked by being regenerative, adaptive, Omni considerate to use one of my favorite words from Daniel, right? So imagine if every project, every business, everything that we approached had those primary principles that it is adaptive, regenerative and Omni, considerate meaning in our systems thinking approach, we consider the impact on all not just ourselves, our bottom line, not just in our company, not just in our industry, not just in our city, but on us being not just our own kind of people that citizens of planet Earth you know, Barbara Marx, Hubbard we have Patricia in the in the in the room and her sister is a dear friend. And she talks a lot about us real like reimagining ourselves, not as you know, I'm Jennifer, and I'm from Texas, or I live in California, but I'm a citizen of planet Earth. And that if you just shift into that mindset, and you shift your thinking around how you organize your projects, such that they are at their basis regenerative on the considerate and adaptive, then we're going to be a lot better off. And so I just encourage that. I mean, I was inspired by what you said, Tom, and by, you know, work I've done with Daniel. 

Nadia 59:23  
So anything that you'd like to add to that, perhaps specific examples of organizations or initiatives that you've seen, that are working towards a different reality, and what they're doing and what their vision is, perhaps in macroeconomics?

Daniel 59:39  
So coming back to the topic for a moment of interconnectedness, and actually understanding our interconnectedness with each other with the planet with the topsoil with everything else, just quick exercise, think about yourself and then think about who you would be without the atmosphere. And you realize very quickly, it's a nonsense question, right? Like, he wouldn't be anything it wouldn't exist. So do you think about who would you be without all of the plants and trees and, and allergies that make the atmosphere? You wouldn't be easy? Could you be without the gravitation and the electromagnetism and the forces of universe that actually make our planet work would you be without the previous people that developed a language in which you think and process the world. And you realize that the idea of I, the way we usually think of it as a separate concept is a misnomer. It's a wrong concept. Because we like to typically think of me my consciousness associated with this body and maybe being kind of on the inside of it. And maybe kind of traditional neuroscientific framework is maybe consciousness is an emergent property of brains or this kind of system. But my sense of self, Daniel, this is actually an emergent property of this self organizing system and the rest of universe and yes, maybe if a particular brain region is damaged, a capacity is lost, but also changes out here. Change sense of self, right? So when you get that, and you really kind of take deeply, the way I have thought of I've it doesn't include the rest of the universe is actually a home way of thinking. 
So, then, the idea of separate interest and especially not just separate interest, but even competitive interest, the idea that I could advantage myself at the expense of something else that is actually defining to what I know is not just a misnomer, it is pathologic, right, in the deepest kind of sense. When we think about burning witches, because which meant that they used herbs instead of just prayer or something like that, and the, you know, the Dark Ages, we we can think of that now, as a ubiquitously social insanity of the of the whole group of people, right, but there are a whole group of people that bought into the concept that was not just wrong or silly but it but criminally insane. But what we don't get is that we actually still have a big business insanity that is driving, give or take 13 species to extinction every day that's depleting the top. So rather than growing and that's, that's thinking, if we think of insanity, psychosis says, believing stuff that isn't true. And then kind of pathological insanity is acting on that in ways that actually cause fundamental harm. Then we've got this we've got social ubiquitous insanity we have to address right. So the concept of separate balance sheets at the level of the individual or corporation or a country that can grow by externalizing harm to the commons or somewhere else is actually underneath so many of our problems right in relationship, the idea that you can ever win a fight with your spouse to complete nonsense concept. If you really factor all the externalities and cause and effect equations or the idea of That our life can actually get better by winning a war, which is a nonsense concept, right? So there's really only one balance sheet that matters, which is the balance sheet of all universe. 
And they just bring it back from and we can think of the balance sheet of this biosphere, because we have very deep interaction here. And so then we say, Well, how do I dedicate my life to evolving the balance sheet of this biosphere of the commons and everyone's access to it? And if you think about Tom's question of it, the biggest companies in the world still represent the tiniest fraction of global movement of resources. We say okay, depending upon how you measure it if you consider derivatives money or not, or narrow money, or there's different numbers, but one of this kind of Central numbers is the amount of dollars that changes hands every day is in the vicinity of 70 trillion. Well think about $70 trillion trade hands every day, almost every one of them externalizes some harm. To the comments, right? Almost every product involved and renewable mining and distribution, etc, that creates pollution. And many of these things irreversible and even surface economies exist on top of product economies that mediate them. So if I've got $70 trillion, trading hands every day externalizing harm towards points of chemical irreversibility, meaning the end of the planets, life support systems. Even if I had a billion dollars of nonprofit money per day that didn't have to make money that just got to be allocated to solving problems. It's like five orders of magnitude too small.
So, in that equation that I looked at, you know, earlier, well, why are we treating the cows this way? Well, it was an economics equation of they weren't sentient things. They were commodities. And we were looking at, you know, optimization of a balance sheet in a very narrow way. When we were looking at whaling. That whale is a million dollars of economic advantage on a Japanese fish. Boat but it's worth nothing alive in the ocean on anyone's balance sheet now happens to be on nature's balance sheet happens to be relevant to all of our life. But it provides no real time this quarter this state differential advantage to me to leave it up there, but I get immediate differential advantage to kill it. But that's also true for old growth forests if I cut them down that trees 100 grand is two by fours, but it's worth nothing alive even though it maintains the atmosphere without which I don't exist. That overly narrow, overly short term nonsensical thinking is driving you know whether we want to look at species extinction or topsoil erosion or, or bad health care issues or a for profit military industrial complex that is invested in ongoing war, any of those things. So we say, all right, can we have a macro economic system where things are worth more to us than alive and we actually need that because if I don't get stuff, then my kids start. And then once they are done starving, they don't get to go to college. And so every level of Maslow's Hierarchy requires we get stuff. We're that isn't extraordinary macro economic system. So then it's how can we change that macro economic system? 
Because economics is right at the interface between our values, right? Do I value that way of life? Do I value it? Right? It's a value system that is codified as a value equation, gold is worth this much per ounce oxygen is worth How much? Well, that oxygen is abundant enough that we don't really make it worth anything, which is why the balance sheet calculation will drive us to burn it up. But the gold is worth enough that will damage whole ecosystems to go get, even though then all we're going to do is stick it in safes that provide no real meaningful value to anyone, because it's just based on a nonsense concept of scarcity that if there's not that much of it, not everybody can have it. And so if I have it, I get differential competitive advantage over the other people that actually defined my existence. This this is pathologic insanity, right? So if I can't live with Four minutes without oxygen, it should be on the top of the fucking value equation that drives the decision. So what would it mean, to restructure macroeconomics where we didn't think of other sentient things as resources, but we thought of them as also beneficiaries of the comments. What would it mean to have living things be worth more in real measurable macroeconomic terms algorithmic terms than they are worth dead? What would it mean to internalize every externality so that my own getting ahead and my omni-positive effect on all that I affect are the same thing? It doesn't look anything like any version of capitalism that's ever been published?
It also doesn't look like any version of any economic system that's ever been proposed. But it's important to get that when you look at the conversations of Marx or Adam Smith, and they talk about how do we deal with the labor economy and incentive to do the shitty jobs and then we have technological automation of all the shitty jobs, we're changing the axioms. Like we're technologically changing the axioms of why we thought the best way to do stuff as the best way of doing it, when right now Internet of Things is bringing us to a place where we have a near term ability to have a sensor driven balance sheet of the comments where we can actually measure the entire natural and built world comments, and real time inventory it have a balance sheet for it, and then be able to use complex data science to optimize the allocation of all the world's resources to meeting all the world's needs. That wasn't something that Adam Smith or Karl Marx thought about. So what that means is, we actually have to rethink our foundational axioms of how we do shit, right? And if I could kind of leave anyone, leave people here with anything it would be whatever you think, are the fundamental frameworks of truth that you have to think within question those things. And question if those foundational frameworks are not only maybe not true, but fundamentally problematic, right? And look at how can we redesign civilization in terms of our definition of self, in terms of macroenomics in terms of governance, in terms of what we think love is, in a way that is adequate to what's really needed and aligned with our highest potential.

Nadia 1:09:21  
So I'm going to ask one more question and then turn it over to the audience. So Daniel you're just talking about each human being and their highest potential. And one of the things we'll talk about tomorrow during the design of your life day is the question of what brings you most alive and what brings you most in flow. I'm curious for each of you, when you feel like your most in flow, in service and being at your highest when you're in service, and how you've learned what that is and design your life around that and any other kind of philosophies that you use and values that you use to lead your life and day to day basis.

Tom 1:10:07  
So that's kind of like really broad. And there's lots of things for me to be in flow so that there is, there's like a phrase, which is like you can tell a lot of person about a person by what gets them up in the morning and what keeps them up at night. And so you answer those two questions, you'll understand what your fundamental hope is and what your fundamental fear is. My fundamental hope is that humanity can be a net positive to nature. And I like wake up every day, like what can I do today? That is going to be part of doing that thing. I have like a realistic sensibility that it took us thousands of years to mess it up this bad, and it might take us 1000 years to dig out of it, even if we like really got on it. So like, really, my lifetime might be 2% of it. And like, let me do it. as much of the 2% as I can, that are, let me pull people, you know, and find other inspiring people that like, want to go on the journey of the 2% of like healing in this time period. And I think those things actually helped me a lot, because I feel like the things that stalled people is a type of ambitions kind of great, but there's like the attachment to the fruits of ambition that like really screw people up. And if I were to, like, you know, roll out there and be like, I'm going to be the person that makes it so that, you know, this thousand year transition happens in my lifetime. You know, it's, I don't know, like some other part of my body would explode not just by the GI tract, right? It's a disaster. 
I'd be dead tomorrow, probably. So. So like, for a second, absolutely. Look at your ambitions and be like, like, for me, it helps me a lot like so there's another phrase that says, It's not what a goal is. It's what a goal does. So that formulation of my goal helps A lot to know that I might only get 2% done, but it's 2% thousand, right right down that lane. I'm all over it that if I try to internalize 100%, as much as like, my brain likes to like ramp, stretch around the, like saran wrap and stretch around it and like try to understand the hundred percent. Like, I recognize I won't change 100%. And it would like exclude me to like, try to go do it all. So let me say, what's the 2% that we're going to start on? What's the trim tab that we can start to nudge but even that'll probably be, you know, three dozen trim tabs across, you know, millions of people and that is out, right? And like, I love that actually, like what that goal does to me, is it like it? It like starts to fan out into what what are you actually going to do to make it happen? Obviously, you need to wake up every day and then do something about it. 
But since you're not going to do 100% of it, like how do you inspire the next set of people to do some of the things how do you attract a bunch of people to work on some of the things that you're working on right now? Like how do you keep on questioning and filtering down and getting to the essentials of what's going to make a difference today, as opposed to what just looks good or gets a lot of, you know, likes on social media. Right? And it's like, My first job was as a physicist, and it's like, at the end of the day, like matter energy, you know, is going to change, or nothing changed. Right? So like, when I see like things where it's like, oh, this is a person that's so good at like, online, whatever. And I'm like, Well, what, what, what are the atoms that changed? And if nothing changed, and I'm like, Well, nothing changed. And I'm not trying to be a jerk. It's just like, let's keep it practical is keep it really clean. Let's stick with our the atoms and the energy changing. If it isn't, then let's just go back to it and see if there's another way to do it, where the atoms and energy will change a little bit more. And if that not that, then we'll try it again and a little bit more. Try it again, a little bit more, but eventually, you'll figure out how to do your 2% and that's all right, like that's all you're gonna do in this life, and I think it's fucking phenomenal. So that's probably all.

Jennifer 1:14:08  
I think the question is like what puts you in that flow state? I will tell you what takes me out of it is a shadow I see, you know, in our culture on there is you with you, with you. If I can bring myself geographically, physically, emotionally, mentally and spiritually near the thing I want to impact and have that my consciousness be located where it is as close as I can get it, where it is part of me and I am part of it, that I am not the one that needs to be smart. I never will be because I am sourcing my motivations, my intelligence, my resources, from everyone who cares about that thing. You know, if I focus my my my reality on solving Even there's billions of people that care about solving that. And now I have the resources of all of them on my side, cheering me on. And when I can take my focus, my consciousness, my identification, and put it out there not be all the way absorbed in my own experience, but actually include you in my experience, all of a sudden, when you have a yearning question, and it's real, excited me talking anymore. It's you in your higher self in mind having a conversation and I'm just one of the delivers and one of the faces for you, as you are for me in that moment. And so for me, that's where flow state occurs is when I can identify with a larger concern. And that's what I do. 
The second thing I do is meditation, which may sound paradoxical. Right? So meditation is a little bit about taking out all of the stimulus for a moment. We are so stimulated. And for me as a practice of getting comfort in the discomfort of the fertile void, where there is nothing and I don't have anything adulterating my consciousness. And then I allow what needs to arise is kind of like the active feminine form of power influence. That is my leadership model that I teach. I get into that and see what is the field when I kind of reduce all of the other stimuli? What is the intuition say, you know, we have two forms of intelligence in my is a gross over generalization, but we have like a discriminative mind that evaluates compares, looks at past and sees what should we do based on what's happened before. It's an incredible form of intelligence. We need that form. But there's the intuitive mind, and the intuitive mind is pulling vast multiple simultaneous inputs all at once. so vast that we can't actually compress it and understand it. So it comes as an impulse from that fertile void. And it's so much more intelligent, because this intelligence includes all of us and all life. So my practice is to either locate myself with you out of my self absorption or with the challenge and all of the resources that are available there, or to cut the stimulus and go into the intuitive fertile void and feel the field. And from there, I just marvel at the creativity that I am just a humble receiver of.

Daniel 1:17:50
Jennifer actually shared something that triggered kind of deep philosophy. You see how she practices the intuitive intelligence and the analytic both, the masculine and the feminine, and the active and the passive. One of the deep kind of life philosophies for me is transcending and reconciling false dichotomies. So if my logical thinking about something, in my intuitive sense on something are in conflict, I don't move forward with either until they're not in conflict, because they're actually both meaningful types of intelligence. And one of them, or both of them are not fully there yet, if they haven't brought me to a commensurate place. So that's kind of a key thing, right? If you think that they're just that fundamental internal conflict where you go with one of them. I don't think you respect either of those tools enough. If what it seems like is going to be in my best interest and what's in the best interest of someone else, even conflict, I don't move forward until I reconcile that in my best interest and the interest of everyone affected are simultaneously optimized by the same strategy. We can kind of see this everywhere where it's like when you understand how interconnected universes, then you realize that everything that matters is inter commensurate. 
And none of it in fundamental unreconcilable dichotomy. This is key to so many things. So it's like, do I want to love the moment exactly the way it is? Or do I want to work to make a better future? And the answer is against both. Right? And those are totally reconcilable without a weird thought of paradox because, as Tom said, we're more verbs and we are nouns and all existence is more verb and noun, it's a becoming blossoming process. When I love the moment as it is, it's not a static thing. Loving it as it is means status. It means I love also the impulse to grow and evolve Express within it. And when I love that actively, I want to help help it right. Do I love and accept myself unconditionally or work to help myself evolve? Yes. Right. So I would look at any place where there are what seemed like false dichotomies where you have to damage or neglect something You care about to move forward on something else you care about and don't do that. And then make it a design challenge to say, How do I optimize all of the things I care about simultaneously? And then that's the sign that it might be a good strategy. That's one of my kind of deep practices.

Nadia 1:20:25  
Questions from the audience? You guys, saw your hand go up first.

Question 1 1:20:43  
My name is Sloane, but I have this moniker called sotus. So I go by Sotus. Some four star generals were like really confused by this. They're like, what the hell is sodus? And I was like, Hi, I'm secretary of information state and then I'm just trying to say okay, I've been working on economic plan, it can unite the whole world. And then delivered insights, so we can start changing stuff and power dynamics are going to shred. And then we can like look equally in a not so scary. So my question is, this is like pro bono gift to the world. Writing a bio to come here was like, really fucking hard. Congratulations to all of you awesome people because you can define yourself. I'm just trying to get to work in liasing intelligence to seriously pave a road to accountability because there's no failure to innovate. It's like literally a failure to communicate. And my greatest gift is meeting you guys because I've been on this planet. 20 years. I've never met anyone like me. And I don't know how to fund me because this thing is like, I go into a meeting. I'm like, this is this seesaw effect here was national security, here's consumer, this was like insights, here's innovation. This is how everybody else got these really complicated products that we do every single day. And then there's like this triangle, which was the fulcrum of the seesaw, which is like the insights and then everybody needs the data now to like, do stuff. 
Whoa. How do we do it? So my question is, how do we do it together? I can't do it alone anymore. And you guys work on Brain Stuff. I like spent the past year detangling my brain to understand the human condition and stuff like that. And it's really cool. But if we keep clicking, into interface to interface, we're going to lose the fact that the last thing is our mind, and that is so insecure. So we really need to start instituting new beliefs and new customs and new culture universally in this information state to pass that down onto the next generations and like that's, that's the big question. So that's not a direct question. That's like for everybody here.

Tom 1:23:10  
Okay, that's great. That's amazing. So check it out. There's a big difference between, like, knowing what's going to need to happen, and the doing of this stuff. And what I'll say is that your worry and frustration are not your friend. Like, basically, you're worrying fresh people have the belief that if something's really important, you got to worry about it more. But when you worry about it more, you're bringing less of yourself. The worried self is like an addled brain. Your brain sucks when it's worried. You can't be creative. You can't find connections, you can't connect with people very well, when you're worried. That's not the you that you need to solve the things that you care about. So if you love something, you care about it, you want it you, you want to improve it, do not worry about it at all. That's you deciding to suck. So don't do that. Okay, number two, so let it just calm down. It's cool. Don't worry. is much. Number two, you're going to run into all these people and it's going to be a disaster. You're like, oh, man, I totally see it. They can't see it at all. What's going on? Well, here's the thing, metabolizability is more important than truth. What do I mean by that? It means like, you need to say stuff that people can understand. Right? So maybe you've been thinking about this so hard, your brain is in like some PhD level around something. And then you're going to go talk to the group of second graders and give your PhD lecture. That is not going to go over that well, especially if the output of your PhD lecture means they lose status in the world or they need to change how they do things, and so forth. That's crazytown. That's the recipe for you to be frustrated the rest of your life. Don't do that. 
Instead, if you go into a second grade classroom, teach third grade, and be like, Hey, this is an enlightning lesson to you. Right? And like when the second graders hear that, they're like, oh, oh, god, know that fractions. That's pretty cool, man. I like fractions. Now sure, maybe you're doing like some Crazy like whatever, linear algebra, differential equations, some crazy ass stuff, who knows, right? But it's like, forget about it. That's not what you teach, you teach what's metabolizable to the people that you meet. So if you meet some people, and all they're going to do is, that your interaction with them is going to get them from second or third grade. Congratulations, that's what you're doing with that. And you meet some other people, and they're in 10th grade, and you're like, nice, man, I get to talk about some 11th grade stuff. This is pretty sweet. It's a nice tree. And every once while you're going to run into people, you're like, Look, I haven't run into a bunch of people like you. And me. I don't even know what that means in 20 years, but it's like, great, maybe we'll go off and we'll have like some graduate school talk. We'll have a postdoc talk. That'd be that'd be freaking fun. But like, don't worry about it, that everybody's not talking like that. Like your goal is somebody who is trying to be of service in the world is if they're in second grade, let's teach third. And actually, let me learn some stuff too, because there's some stuff I can learn from the second grader. Freaking great. And just don't worry so much. Bring it down to the level. Just keep in it yet and yeah, just go a grade up, maybe two.

Question 2 1:26:20  
Daniel mentioned was a question of the abundance of air for example and the lack of value, how much is there worth? I think some of it probably does mean we have to recognize our privilege, in being able to sort of take that step back and see that air has value versus perhaps the immediate need for food or water or shelter or whatever it might be. So I'm wondering how you think about sort of toppling systems where, perhaps, as some of us thinking, not all of it, but it's happening in rooms like this, and which is not the room that you know, billions of people in the world are inhabiting so. wondering about that. And then I personally have been doing a lot of my work in financial services and an agriculture and food security. And a lot of sort of my last seven years of living and working in Africa has been about like, how do we create new systems for these things that actually work for smallholder farmers or for small medium enterprises. And my view is that similarly, you know, things need to be broken. And what's happening right now with some of the mergers with a lot of the existing provision of the services is not working and not beneficial. So I was wondering if you outside of the thinking side the brain and found organizations or models that you think can actually lead to this new sort of macro and micro economy.

Daniel 1:27:47  
So I'll say something that will be able to speak to it adequately in this time, but I'm happy to speak deeper later and share some things on exactly those topics. One of the things that happened that was that was most challenging for me early on was, we talked to some of the people at the UN World Food Program on how to enroll hunger. And they showed their very comprehensive plan on how to do it. And it involved things like more NPK fertilizer near a bunch of river deltas, that leads to more dead zones in the ocean towards the point of actual Auto telesis the extinction of our entire species. And I said, well, it's not such a great plan, because your metric of less people dying this year is actually good. But we can all go extinct if you succeed faster. And they're like, will that makes sense? But those aren't our metrics were tasked with. And I talked to the guys at the IPCC on climate change on geoengineering. And they're like, what do you think about these particular sulfates in the atmosphere to reflect 20% of the Sun out so that we get the temperature down? I'm like, Well, here's the externalities of doing that. They're really bad. And you didn't address any of the underlying cause. And here's all the other things happen that are really bad. 
And again, we're actually accelerating extinction and they're getting Well, those aren't our metrics are metric was temperature. So one of an actually gave up on retrofitting those systems and building ones, right. And the same with macro economics is anything that is affected has to be internalized to the equation that determines incentive decision making and how powers convert. And as long as there's anything that is external lies, that gap of externality will be the badness of the strategy. So without getting into the specifics right now, which I would love to do in depth, because it sounds like you're doing really great work, I would say, just like Tom talks about as a design process, like be in the work and make sure that it's actually, you know, working the prototype. Another one I would say is, make sure that you're thinking about the entire system, all of the cause that comes in all of the effects coming out. Make sure you're internalizing the externalities and you're factoring complex cause and effect, just as a design thinking for whether you're dealing with hunger or how to address poverty or the relationship between hunger and poverty. So that's just that's it is design thinking thing. Makes sense. And I just wanted to say, forgive me real quick, one more thing to your question earlier, I will triple down on everything Tom said and feedback to you. One of the thing I'd say is, I think it probably comes up for a lot of people here. 
No one can adequately define themselves, whatever their definition is wrong. It is a definition of some function they have or some role they play, which is cool and useful, but not that. If you try and be understood by defining yourself like it's just fuck, you're just never going to succeed with that. So give up on that total. And the degree to which you can give up on wanting to be understood in that way. It will help things go so much better. So when I'm talking to people, and they ask kind of my background, I'd like to get their background first and I say whatever is relevant about me I don't say I don't try and have them give me just a wanted to be relevant to the degree to which you can decouple your own desire for belonging being Understood with how to actually be effective on a project super helpful. And then you'll have some people that you're really close with interpersonally that you feel like rock you not because of a bio, but because they crossed you. And those are two different ways to get those things met. And then it's much easier to do what Tom said of just share a relevant thing, because it actually is not about any in a relational process. And I would just kind of share with everybody here if you are thinking about, Well, fuck, those guys are so smart, or those guys are, what is my unique value proposition? The degree to which you can stop thinking that is really good. And just say how can I help this scenario? And like Jennifer said, you get out of the thinking about me clusterfuck which is so helpful, because however you define your unique value proposition is wrong. It is actually ineffable it is a synergistic emergent that is fundamentally more than the sum of all the partial definitions you can give to it. Just giving up on that's really helpful.

Nadia 1:34:00
Thank you everyone, that was beautiful.