Fernanda 1:00  
Hi, welcome to this conversation. We have with us Daniel Schmactenberger. And I invited him on today because I find him to be really exquisite. He goes into a full flow of topics and themes that are really, really important for the civilizations that we want to bring, that we want to design. And not only in terms of the fury, but also in terms of the practice, and the practice not only in the enterpreneurship, and the things that he creates manifest in the world, but in buttoning himself. He has been my perspective, a very pioneering spirit, and a very curious mind, and a very sharp intellect but very well grounded in his heart. So today, we're going to have these conversation with female about the spaces, but we're going to enter into one questions through one particular part of the work that I'm interested in sharing with the integral people, which is no tropics and complex medicine, science will embrace that. But then we'll be going and navigating into different types of feelings that will open up, but all directed into sensing what is that we need to do in this moment? Where are the practical steps, where are the activities, what is happening the world that can inform us, what we can do in this moment of transition, what do we can do to develop higher waves and better census of who we are together as collective?

Daniel 2:48  
Hi Fernanda, happy to be here with you. Thank you. I'm delighted to have you here today.

Fernanda 2:54  
So, as I mentioned, I want to have like one entry point call, question for us to start with around, nootropics and around the work that you do in the neuro hacker collective. But first, perhaps the first question is, can you tell us what nootropics are so that people in the US like can understand?

Daniel 3:20  
Sure, why it's important. So nootropics are chemicals that enhance some aspect of cognitive function. The kind of formal best definition of nootropics is any chemical that can enhance some aspect of cognitive function like memory or focus or verbal fluency or pattern recognition beyond someone's normal baseline without meaningful negative side effects. And so this is in contradistinction to bring nutrients, which are all the vitamins, minerals, amino acids, fatty acids, that brain just naturally need your nervous system and hold that embodied cognition, a whole physiology needs to be in the process information, well, those aren't going to really elevate cognitive capacity beyond baseline, they're just going to bring you back to baseline if there's deficiency because those are really part of the evolutionary environment, right? So brain nutrients are foundational things. And then what we think of as smart drugs, which are usually pharmaceuticals, that are for a DD or sometimes narcolepsy, or sometimes neurodegenerative diseases, that can enhance some aspect of cognitive function, but usually it's fairly narrow, and usually it's with some side effects. So this is Adderall, modafinil, vyvanse, Ritalin, you know, those kinds of psychostimulants, psych meds and many other things. So nootropics are this kind of interesting category that's trying to see if we can elevate aspects of cognitive and then more widely also psycho cognitive function from a neuro physiological, you know, biochemistry perspective and if we can do it without negative side effects any even ideally was lasting benefits. So that's kind of the field and why it's interesting.

Fernanda 5:05
Yes for me it's really interesting. I started to do a research similar to that back in the late 90s, before red wall or those were again companies and I started to use like Warren and I started to use like ginkgo biloba, and things like that. And just like notice what happened to me what happened groovers to my memory, what happened to the rest of my ability to focus? And that was really interesting. And I know that you've been developing a product from the product is out and I've been testing that and I really, really enjoy it. I can tell you many different experiences that I had with Paul. Yeah, but that's not the point for the conversation, but the printer that I want to enter into is do these I understand that that by using nootropics. We can enhance and cognitive function, but have you used it? Have you experienced? What does it create when? When a certain group of people do it together the city and has the collective capacity? 

Daniel 6:16  
Hmm, interesting question. So when we think of chemistry, we think of affecting neuro chemistry in a way that's going to affect people's psyches that are going to affect them in or personally, in terms of positive experiences we usually think of in pathogens, right. So whether we're talking about on the very mild side, so many reasons that people come together and drink alcohol together or use marijuana together is because they get access some shared state of experience and maybe one that decreases inhibitions or decreases anxiety and allows for some increased bandwidth of connectivity. And then deeper than that is things like MDMA, other usually female athlete mean some tryptamines, some other categories of psychedelic, but that are specifically empathy increasing, that are kind of relationship increasing in terms of the neuro chemistry they effect, which is almost exactly opposite to what usually happens with the nootropic class of chemicals.
So if we reference not nootropics, but smart drugs again, most people are taking smart drugs for pretty individualistic purposes, right, they're having a hard time focusing. And they're not accomplishing as much as they want to, they want to increase their creative productive output when they're on kind of single solo work. And so, hetero works for that you know it as a dopamine agonist will increase focus and will increase motivation now, and unfortunately, as a pretty strong, exogenous dopamine agonist. It's also means that if you use that for a while, it's going to decrease your own endogenous doping regulatory process, which means addiction. And memory is really not primarily doping mediated. It's acetylcholine and, and you know, many other neurotransmitters glutamates involved in other chemical means are involved. So the brain is a very complex organ, right? And the brain, nervous system, Body, Mind environment complex as a whole complex of complex systems. And when we're especially dealing with not just human physiology, but we're dealing with kind of the psychiatry or psycho neuro interface where we're looking at the way that the upper right quadrant affects the upper left, right, we could look at the other side of the way mindfulness and phenomenal logic things in the upper left affect, you know, the upper right, but typically when we're thinking of the psychiatry direction, we're looking at the effect of body on mine. 
This is a really tricky thing to do from an epistemology point of view, because not only do we have to factor complex systems and many different complex systems gut brain axis and methylation in genomics and head trauma and so many things. But we also have to factor across the logic categories, right? How do we assess causation of something rising in consciousness from something arising in physiology without reducing one quadrant to the other? So we causation isn't an adequate way to think about it. But so there's a lot of reasons that the whole field of psychiatry and psychopharmacology are just profoundly inadequate to the scope of the actual needs of that space into the ontology of how the space works. But, you know, because we're typically with psychostimulants, where people are taking corner effects, they're going to be affecting a pretty narrow bandwidth of things. They're usually actually things that decrease empathy. Right, if you drive dope mean, and then that's going to turn into increase norepinephrine and epinephrine and you can move into a more sympathetic less parasympathetic place. And so one of the common experiences that people have when they're on psychostimulants for increased productivity is as they get more frustrated when someone interrupts them, and they have to do task switching, they have less empathy, and sometimes even depersonalization or D realization. And so one of our main goals was can we increase can we support increasing focus and attention and concentration, and memory and pattern recognition and those kinds of cognitive traits without negatively affecting their psychosocial and maybe even positively affecting it. So this was like one of our, our big goals. And if you think about it, is how to affect both sides of the meaningful dialectics at once more ability to intensely focus and better tasks switching. Those are very, very different tracks. And so then we're not talking about a brain that's more optimized for one or the other or a second.
It's more optimized for one of the other we're talking about a more adaptive system, they can actually respond adaptively environment needs now. So we that was a really interesting deep dive for us to look at the chemistry and the neurology that was associated with very different types of cognitive and psycho emotional states. And see how can we seek to benefit the adaptive capacity of the whole system, the endogenous regulatory capacity of the whole system, and across those kind of dialectic differences.

Fernanda 11:34  
And has it been in your experience like stories of success? What have you been observing in your own experience, of course.

Daniel 11:46  
Well, I mean, so with with this product that we've got to bring to a lot of people now with quality. We have a pretty meaningful amount of data that's come back to us. And one of the things that a lot of people have reported is increased empathy, increased vicarious experience increased social intelligence, social awareness, and a lot of decrease of inner anxiety inner critic that damages people's social capacity, right that has them so caught in internal loop that actually have less capacity to actually pay attention to other people rather than project possible triggers on other people. And so, even though that wasn't what it was designed for, it was a design constraint. We were hoping it would move in the direction of it's been beautiful to see that that's actually been the experience of many people, especially factoring that usually the processes that drive cognitive chemistry did the opposite.

Fernanda 12:43  
That's interesting. Yeah. I use it once for going into a keynote and that I did a presentation, and I was so happy, and I was so exhausted the day before. And then that day, I was so on. Then I feel so happy. I was really literally feeling beautiful connection with people. And very aware, as you said, like there's a specific form of presence that happens. So I think that there could be a lot of research that can be done around what happens when we intentionally go into the space as individuals to create a specific waste space while empowering ourselves or enhancing ourselves through the use of a nootropic. So that would be interesting and speaking about pattern recognition, but in a collective, I would like to definitely see that pattern recognition. 

Daniel 13:50
There's something funny that you said which is, when we look at the pharmacology of it, pattern recognition is significantly mediated by dopamine. So, when we get excessive docq mean, we get tickets financee patterns that aren't there. And I mean, that's oversimplifying, but drug-induced, methamphetamine-induced schizophrenia breaks are exactly that right starting to perceive and recognize patterns that aren't actually there because of over pattern fitting from being over dopaminergic. And under dopaminergic means not recognizing patterns that most people would recognize. So that's a cognitive thing. But don't mean there's also a major aspect of emotional function in terms of people's motivational and kind of reward circuitry processes. And what's so interesting is that all the chemicals that mediate cognitive process also affect emotional process and vice versa. And so, a clearer thinking mind and a emotionally more well balanced person from a physiologic point of view correspond very much. And that doesn't mean there aren't certain cases where one can, you know, have a certain set of clear thinking well, having existential depression, but for the most part, those seem to be simultaneously optimized generally. Mm hmm. There's also this thing where, again, this is not a complete story. And whenever I'm speaking with it in a broad sense, we have to make sure we're not over assessing causation from one quadrant to another but the the side of cognitive behavioral therapy, which is true, which is that we are not just perceiving the world directly we're perceiving the world making meaning of it, and then emotionally reacting to not just the perceptions with the meaning. That's basically not thinking clearly. Right? fair to say that's actually not perceiving the world exactly as it is not assessing risk appropriately, right, not assessing reward or meaning or interpretation, appropriately taking old traumas and overweighting certain things in terms of meaning that's being added. So there's a way in which just thinking more clearly relieves a lot of emotional drama and dynamics. Because you are not making up stories that just aren't actually true and aren't clear thinking.

Fernanda 16:04  
Yes, the brain is like more active and more in presence, able to go faster into identifying things that might be detrimental or fears or bothering or cognitive biases and just like see that with with clarity and then moving on rapidly.

Daniel 16:25  
This is really fun. Chemical that is in phase two clinical trials for major depressive disorder by a company called neural stem right now many people are familiar with nootropics will have heard of it's called NSI 189. And it is basically a neurogenic. This company neural stem started out doing als work. And they were actually developing neural stem cells and injecting them they were also going to do spinal cord injuries. And they started looking for small molecules that could actually increase the proliferation of the neural stem cells and they found about six to dead and then an essay when a nine was their best shot. And so rather than have to actually print stem cells and they can use the small molecule orally and the body's own process of creating, you know, if neurogenesis, creating new neurons and hippocampus, then they can move throughout, anywhere in the nervous system is just increased. So this is like super interesting. There's a lot of ways that you can increase neurogenesis. But this is actually a drug that's pretty far along. And even though it was for ALS to begin with, and it was for then, you know, starting to look at actually repairing damaged, nervous system, either from neurodegenerative disease or injury. The reason it's curing major depressive disorder, their hypothesis is that they're actually seeing increased hippocampal volume gray matter density volume in the hippocampus with use and seeing decreased depression. They're actually seeing the depression as an inability to process the total amount of emotional information that is coming and that as they can actually process the information better. They can actually find solutions and conclusions and not be overwhelmed and you know, left in those, those emotional places. And there's a number of other techniques and processes that work through neurogenesis that are finding this. So this is very interesting of like increased information processing capacity, not being just a cognitive thing, but being very related to emotion, which then of course, relates to someone's capacity for we space.

Fernanda 18:20  
Right? Let's then it's capacity to perceive, right because what is crowded, we perceive that emotional information. So he said, like 10, I tend to think is the heart. Right always like that. We have like that capacity to sense and two cents. It's someone else when we're there in presence with them what is happening in their space or intuition or instinct. But then we get the insights from the verbal communication of whatever they're telling us and you can see when somebody is tight or is open, and then that also creates a certain space of time. What's the secret space of feeling together in resonance, I would say, with one another.

Daniel 19:11  
You said perception, I'd say a way that we think about it often is sensory input, perception, information, implementing processing of that sensory input to make meaning out of it and informed choices, and then choice actuator output. And then being able to perceive again, the effect of our actions and we have a closed loop that really defines what is adaptive and any complex adaptive system. And in any kind of animal any biologic system in sensory input is worthless by itself if we can't actually make sense of it and act on it. Right. Action capacity would be meaningless if it couldn't be informed by the right information necessary to make it the right action. So evolution is actually selecting for this closed loop information. Cycle of information input information. Processing sense making meaning making actuator output and then learning and that's what allows development. And so then we think about that from a neurologic point of view, what is the what are the what's the neurophysiology involved in all three of those stages? And how do we actually increase the effectiveness of that learning new information processing?

Fernanda 20:21  
So if you would name What are the levels of development that that nootropics would work on? What would those have been? It's obviously the cognitive one, with the would they be also like in the emotional one? Or would be because I have heard many learning, right learning and skill. But I also seen videos of people that are doing artistry or doing arts and they're using it for more flow. So it's right brain, left brain. So could you talk a little bit more about that?

Daniel 20:56  
I think the word nootropics is maybe too narrow here. Because that word is usually used to denote cognitive functions specifically, but as we've been talking about cognitive and emotional are not that separate and, and athletic capacities that relate to sensing and motor capacity faster. The acetylcholine that increases motor capacity is the same acetylcholine that's focused on memory consolidation. And so the idea that those different lines of development are totally different independent separately developable pathways and set our physiology is just not how it works, right? It's much more integrated system than that. And so effecting any of those things are going to have some effect on all of them. And that's where we really think about how do we increase it, but in one way, you can call them all information processing, different types of information being processed in different ways, right? And so how do we increase the effective information processing capacity of the entire system across all the lines of development?

Fernanda 21:59  
Thank you. That made me think about information processing in the collective level. And I know that part of what you're doing this work is larger than just medicine isn't why I would want to track what was your intent? What is your true intent, what lies behind this innovation? What do you truly want to create in the world by launching this initiative?

Daniel 22:26  
This is one of lots of products that we've got in development, both for medical applications and wellness, enhancement applications, and all of that just scratching the surface of what kind of the future of human well being, optimization looks like. But why that whole field is interesting. I mean, one, unnecessary suffering sucks, right? And our system of medicine in our system of well being science is good at a few things. And we've kind of tapped those things out. It's really good when the causation is really obvious. And that usually means acute causation. And if the causation is not really obvious, because it's either delayed in time, or it's multifactorial, where it has a complex causal cascade, then we call it an autoimmune disease and neurodegenerative disease, aging, cancer, and just really, they're all idiopathic, we don't really know. So we just do symptomatic treatment. The underlying fiscal structure of medicine is misaligned between good medicine. Because if we're as a business, if we want to optimize the lifetime value of a customer and a customer as a patient, then we're not really looking at preventing illness, and we're not really looking at curing it quickly. Because if I gotta do a billion dollars to go through phase three clinical trials, and then how can we ever make the money back? Right? We're not interested these as they don't affect that many people sit symptom treatment is great, right symptom treatment that causes side effects that you need another drug that's a cross sell and upsell, like from a business point of view, that's great. So the financial structures basically broken the IP structure where we can only look at synthetic molecules that are patentable, and then only during their patent life. And then we have to pretend like we're innovating new, better stuff just because they ran out of patent life, like the IP structures broken, and the epistemology, which is that we're trying to do complicated system science on complex systems, right? We're trying to pretend that you can adjust one or two variables in a radically come complex system and understand what it's going to do, like causation doesn't make sense that way in a complex system, if you think of it more dispositional and with much more complex dynamics of inter causation, so we're interested in just a completely new version of medicine and not even I mean, obsoleting medicine. Well being science and optimization at the physiology level, but then obviously that's just the upper right. And that's obviously affected by the environments that people are in, in the lower right by their psyche in the upper left, right. So then this now we get into how does the individual affect the collective and how are they affected by the collective? And how do we work on those things together. So if we make better if we make an environment that has less toxicity in it, then we're not dealing with diseases that are toxic logic and origin affects the individual that better systems of agriculture, better systems of education, media, but the economic system that doesn't create stress, economic systems, governance system sense banking systems. Now, how can we affect individuals today so that they influence the collective in the right direction. Both directions are true, right? The republican democrat historic debates the libertarian Marxist debates have been around which of those directions were more important and they are reciprocal.
And so why we're real interested in the kind of individual optimization side is obviously human quality of life is intrinsically meaningful period. And it's just intrinsically meaningful. It's actually meaning reifies in subjective experience. And the next step is that we're not just interested in humans having increased quality of life, but also increased capacity to act meaningfully in ways that affect the quality of life of everyone else. Right, not just human, but all all things. And so, it happens to be that what really increases human capacity and what increases their quality of life is the same thing. This is again, optimizing across a dialectic. And so when we were looking at existential crisis, right existential threats, who are looking at catastrophic risks of all kind and environmental, humanitarian, social economic dynamics, and we're looking at the way they're all contributed to by human action. Then the question becomes, well, what are what are all the influences of human action? And how can we work with those to predispose fundamentally more Omni considerate human action? And of course, there are things that influence human behavior in all products. And, you know, thinking about the way the upper left influences human behavior is pretty clear, right? psychological trauma, when you're a kid, you need better psychotherapy, you need better education, you need a better definition of success, and you're kind of individual mimetic structure and the way the lower left right the way that macro economics affects human behavior in terms of what do we actually incent people to do we make we have an economic system where the whales worth a million dollars dead as well me but nothing alive, we're actually affecting human behavior in a pretty clear way through incentive right? Through culture through all status, things through language, right patterns of perception affected by language and affect behavior.
So all of the quadrants lower right environmental psychologies effect on human behaviors radical, right? The upper right, human physiology affects human behavior, not just meaning. Like, mostly when people start thinking about this, they start thinking about eugenics in a hurry and what genes are fundamentally better and worse than this, this is a really not adequate understanding. When someone's hormones are out of balance, when their neurotransmitters are out of balance when their gut is in dysbiosis. They feel very differently and they behave differently. They have different behavioral dispositions and different capacities. Everyone's had a hangover where like, Joy is just not accessible. It's not even an accessible thing. And it's pretty hard not to have negative reactivity. And other people have had states where it's almost hard to be negatively reactive based on physiologic state. And so we started looking at the neuro chemistry and the neuro structure of psychopathy versus the neuro chemistry neural structure of people very high empathy. And the neuro chemistry and neural structure of impulse control disorders, and of aggressive patterns and recognizing how much of human behavior is actually influenced by physiology and what we can do with both better agricultural systems and better medicine systems, better activity systems mean everything to the paint in these walls is producing voc is that are neurotoxic. There's like, fundamentally to really have optimally Healthy People requires rebuilding civilization from scratch with that in mind, right? We can start doing now to take people who are interested in radically increase their quality of life and capacity, so then they can start to affect all the rest of what needs to happen more and we can get virtuous cycles.

Fernanda 29:51  
Wow. Okay, that's an entry point to the integral civilizations design work that you've been doing. And so what is in your perspective, the things that people in their ordinary people that are listening to us need to be looking into, like these steps that people can be more aware in their lives. So that we move together into a partner of well being.

Daniel 30:33  
It's a tricky question because I don't know who's listening and what capacities they have, and what interests in availabilities and etc. So I would, I would generally talk about that in a more personalized and hopefully relevant way. Most of the times we think about actions we can all do in our own life to make things better at a global level. We think about pretty trivial. And I don't mean to say these things aren't important, but trivial relative to the scope and urgency of the issues and complexity, we think about basically consuming less stuff. And organic, consuming better stuff or less stuff right now, which our focus is being less bad. We're we are net negative, we're basically liabilities on nature's balance sheet, right? Rather than assets on nature's balance sheet. If you want to look at the total amount of biodiversity or the health and complexity of the biosphere as a whole, and we're looking at can we slow how bad we are? Like, it's just a totally wrong way of thinking about it. I mean, it's a fine starting point to think about, but really, we actually have to build a new human civilization that is fundamentally on the asset side of nature's balance sheet that is net positive to everything that's meaningful. And that doesn't look like a retrofit of this civilization at all.
Looks like fundamental ground up redesign where I mean, there. Now I don't know how deep will go and how familiar people are. But there, there is no system. There's no version of capitalism. It is adequate as a system of macro economics in the presence of exponential technology, and then the presence of anthro complexity, and fragility of the biosphere at this point, etc. That doesn't lead to catastrophic tipping points. There's no version of representative democracy within nationalist governments, that doesn't lead to catastrophic problems. So the kind of shift that we need is axiom level. And I'm not going to propose Marxism or socialism or any other thing that hasn't worked. I'm going to propose things that are reverse engineered from design constraints of what's actually necessary and sufficient that are fundamentally different than any kinds of systems proposed so far, but I have learned from them learn a lot from how nature and complex systems work. So yeah, if I was to be the thing in general, what can people do to be helpful to that? I would say be aware that civilization as we know, it is self terminating. Stop trying to win at a self terminating game and still denying find out what? Start really earnestly exploring what alternatives that might be viable look like and how you can contribute your life energy to them. 

Fernanda 33:45
So yeah, I do have to agree with you in regards to how we're basing in this collapse in all levels and the complexities way too fast for anyone to really know exactly how. So the amount of number of paths possible. It's overwhelming. It's really, really overwhelming. So what have you found in your research that gives a hope for the future? What is that you found? In your research that it would say, Have you find these places where you say we would find these, then we could reverse into an infinite game, we can actually do this? 

Daniel 34:24  
You know, speaking to an integral audience, there are things that are very hopeful in each quadrant and then across all the quadrants that are already plausible. And lower right. We need to stop building complicated technology, complicated built worlds and start actually building emergent complex worlds that are extensions of the design principles and complexity of the natural world and that are commensurate with it. And this means that you start building individual pieces of tech and you build whole tech ecosystems, right? That are regenerative, closed loop post growth, upcycling tech ecosystems. And this means entire materials economies, where you have a closed loop on the atoms, right? The atoms are actually you're not needing new Adam acquisition from mining or virgin resource acquisition and you're not turning any of the atoms into waste, your fundamental circular economies, circular closed loop economy. And that were the same stuff gets to keep being better and better forms within a fixed number of atoms post growth system. So basically steady state system. With a we're looking at steady state populations that are aligned with the carrying capacity of the planet and their upcycling because pattern information continues to evolve. And we continue to impound new photons. So we have to think of atoms for photons energy and pattern as three totally different non fungible things and the future of economics, we're going to be dealing with a finite number of atoms, we're going to be dealing with a much larger and less bounded amount of energy, and an almost unbounded amount of information. And so those are non fungible with each other. So you can't relate them all to a currency and trade them it doesn't make any sense because they're not actually tradable. So building the right kinds of infrastructure that are actually resilient, complex, closed loop, upcycling infrastructure, that's a very hopeful and exciting thing as possible. In the lower left, we can think about building new systems of sense making intelligence right new systems of governance, choice making. New systems of meaning making collected meaning making, you know, culture. I'll talk about economic actually new systems. Basically resource allocation and human influencing patterns of human behavior, which are the two things that economics really deeply does. As we are moving to a world where most of the shitty jobs can be automated, one of the major axioms of why capitalism mattered was how do we get people to do the shitty jobs. 
They're like, it's fun to lay roads for a day for a couple days and learn how to do it. But nobody wants to spend their whole, you know, multiple decades doing that 40 plus hours a week, but society needs it done. And so, if the jobs need to people to get done, then we got to make it to where the people need the jobs otherwise, you know, if you do a Marxist thing, we spread the resources between everybody then nobody wants to do the shitty jobs and the state has to force them we call it imperialism and so we don't like Marxism. So we'd like it when the market them, which is if you don't do the shitty jobs, you just starve right? But that's free imperialism, and then we say you can educate yourself and get a better job.
That statistically, I mean, it is theoretically possible but statistically very hard when those who are born into more have more resources to create more resources with those were born into less and less. So you get these ever widening gaps, etc. So, but when you can start to automate and you know, we're looking at automation of most of the jobs over the next not too many years.

Fernanda 38:15
And all kinds of jobs, not only the automated very shitty jobs, but also high level right like diagnosis medical.

Daniel 38:30
Anything that you can write a procedure for, you can make a machine do it better than us. It's not that fun for creative beings to spend most as much of their life doing. Yeah. And so you would have to extrinsically and send them to do it because intrinsic incentive wants to do things that are either connection or creativity based. Yes. And so what happens is either we try and stick with capitalism and to have the most grotesque inequality come with technological unemployment. Or we say, Well wait, the whole fucking reason, a major part of the reason for the capitalism, I'm using one axiom, there's obviously 20 others, but we can go through all of them is, well, now that we, the people, that jobs don't need the people anymore, we can also create a Commonwealth economics where the people don't need the jobs. And we move from an economics of extrinsic motive to a system of intrinsic motive where then education is really about facilitating the unique intrinsic motive genius of of everyone. So we actually have the ability to build a new macro economy, where the incentive of every agent, and the well being of every other agent, and of the commons are perfectly aligned with no gap. that gap is the basis for externality. And we've had externality for forever. But with exponential tech. Most people don't really understand what exponential curves do. It means that our intuition and best practices of the past get obsolete faster. Are externalities have already brought the biodiversity of the planet radically down a very short period of time post industrialization. But with exponential tech in this part of the curve, any externality becomes catastrophic fairly quickly. And so in the presence of exponential tech, this the radically increased capacity of individuals to affect reality, we have to affect reality in we have to have, we have to have our choice making increase as exponentially as our impact of our choices do. And so the movement into exponential on the consideration, right exponential Good choice making. But we actually do have the ability to make a macro economic system based on that, where the all systems of systemic incentive, have no externality and they're perfectly line will be now would take a while to get into it. But we actually have architectures for how to do that. So I'm giving a few examples, but I want to let you show us what is hopeful. What's hopeful is that all the things that suck are changeable. And that there actually are adequate architectures for what is necessary and sufficient not just for survival, but for entering a fundamentally new phase of civilization is actually worthy of that trend. Whether we do it or not as a question mark, but the possibility's hopeful.

Fernanda 41:30
Yea as Bernard says, crisis is a terrible opportunity to waste. Okay, so this is the moment and you've spoken a lot about mean economic systems and sense making and then in the run, I will want to go a little deeper in the realm of the lower left quadrant in the type of the terms of the week. So to get it round into the part of how we create those higher weeks right? Why does it matter for people to right now get together and get a better sense of each other and connect not on not only mentally and cognitively but also in terms of resonance and energy because guess we want to be sign according to leading systems and according to nature, and we are nature and as part of nature and its evolution we also have these things called identity and these things called ego and these things called shadow and these things called cognitive biases that three stone masses don't have. And so what what would it be that part of what the we were the the people can do now, and what is to get activated together? So that that we can inform each other because, you know, the way I see it, if jobs that are chilly, or I made it, please go ahead with it. Do it all machines. 
Thank you. I think that human beings that have the space for innovation have a space for philosophy, have a space for culture have a space for creativity, and for other things that we don't know, you know, rounds that have been unexplored because we didn't have we hadn't had that time. We have that we need new ways of making meaning together. Many people make meaning because they have a job, even if it's about job that they don't necessarily like. They learn how to make money based upon that little realm in which they can be active. So the integral people that are exploring the way spaces I find that that I would like to see that part of the research reflect an outcome that is more mainstream that tells people, how to connect when you're not necessarily in alignment in the levels of IDs or in the level of values, but you're in alignment with other parts of yourself. That's why I was interested in seeing what are the the ways in which we can create higher states of consciousness. 

Daniel 44:30
We can see the world in a phase of increasing radicalization. Currently, in many parts of the world, many parts of the industrialized world and the political philosophy around this has been kind of the Machiavellian enemy hypothesis, which is the only way to get people a very different dispositions together as if there's a larger enemy where they have to ban together, otherwise, they'll keep going tribal till they get down to the Dunbar number. And that has been most to true. Right? And so when you look at the very bizarre version of post modernism control left, that is really driving the cohesion of a bunch of different groups into what's now called the alt right. And the white nationalist and etc movements with it. And you look at how far apart those are from each other, how the fuck do you bring that together? Right? And how the fuck does that not become civil war, and how does the civil war in the United States not become World War? Well, if the only way to bring it together, is to have an external enemy we've been in war for decades now right is to have an external enemy big enough that the right and left our friends in relationship the external enemy that's also World War. 
Alright, so these strategies just don't look good at all. And so first, even people who understand military strategy, underestimate both and throw complexity and the unpredictability of 7 billion people and how many non state actors have so much power and etc. And they underestimate what exponential tech really means in terms of that anything applicable in the past it is possible now. So to kind of get into that we saw a couple weeks ago now I don't know when this airs maybe it'll be months ago. A drone drop a thermite bomb in the in the Ukraine on a munitions factory. And it created a, you know, a multibillion dollar level of damage from one little drone. You know, a near nuclear level of damage. And we don't know who did it, but it's easy to do. And that was not even a swarm of drones and building a swarm of drones with as forming algorithms from GitHub that you can build in your own garage. And when we have exponential tech capability, were non state actors were little bitty actors that we can't even know if we're doing anything have catastrophic capability. That's big fun, and it's increasing. Chris wild card just became $1,000 a year ago. Think about what that means. Now, think about what the increasing AI and nanotech capacities mean. Right? And so, the first existential technology, we had tech where we could actually fuck everything up was the bomb. The bomb was such an expensive difficult thing to build. Did you was the only one who had and then US and Russia two superpowers they could be locked in MUGISHA destruction with their Intel systems locked on each other. Nobody could use it. We lived in a Cold War as a method of safety. Yeah. Where's the right weapon? But as soon as we have so many nuclear powers, and you have powers that are as significant as nuclear that you don't even know where they are, they're radically multiple. 
How fucked it how do we make it through that? So, when we define what we're interested in working on, one of the things we define is a civilization that is resilient and anti fragile in the presence of radically distributed exponential tech. Right? How do we have resilience and anti fragility in the presence of that? Well, most answers to that go Orwellian in a hurry. Ubiquitous universal surveillance to know who's doing what and be able to shut it down because we can't let it happen. Well, that's already a failed state because that level of dis coherence from a trust perspective leads to failed failed state for other reasons and dystopia. So the only answer we have to make it through our power curve involves we space, involved a radical upregulation of people knowing each other, knowing when someone is off, no one being that off because they feel so isolated and disenfranchised and existentially thankful, right. And that being structurally built in a way where it is ubiquitous, we actually have no way of making it through that doesn't include that at the center. Now, let me say it another way, because I think it is valuable to think of it this way. You mentioned moving from finite to infinite games. And if there's anyone who hasn't read that book, it's a classic, finite and infinite games to come into, I'm going to speak to it in a even more popular and simple way, which is all finite games are win-lose games. We're actually coming to an end of win lose game theory, at a social level. And this is actually a key way of thinking about we space.
On a sports team, we create a sense of we with our team, and we'll have a lot of coherence with each other to be to beat the other ones and we have a bay with them, right? So we get to do in group out group mentality. Now, that's a training to for kids to be good at that psychology for when it's time for war and, you know, whatever else frame go back to tribes event the time of tribes, we'd create coherence with each other, to be able to be competitive with another tribe if need be. Now if there's low population relative to lots of resources, we're all cool with each other. If the population gets high relative to not that many resources, we start raising the killing the other people as a viable strategy and trying to out compete them for the scarce resources also and strategy. So those are two methods of competing I'll compete them for scarce resources and directly militarily attack them. Now, throughout all of history, two things have been true. One, this strategy worked, you actually could kill the other people get the riverfront and life is better for you and your people. And to if anyone else played win, lose games you had to or lose by default. If you didn't create a military and anyone else has realized this killing other people thing works, then you just die by default. And so militaristic win lose games have been necessary.
And then a couple tribes joined together to be able to fight the bigger tribe they couldn't fight and so then you get more tribes banding together and so now we get villages and kingdoms and nation states and global economic trading blocks. And the tools of commerce increase, we get fiat currency fractional reserve banking etc to increase our power, our tools of extraction of resources from the environment and our military tools increase. This is just upping the ante on win lose games, right? Until we have the biggest players we can possibly fucking have. But the biggest tech we can have in both our ability to compete for scarce resource and to direct attack each other when needed. But you get to a place about now, where you have so much power that you can no longer win. That winning requires destroying the playing field equals losing. And if we try to out compete each other for the scarce resource, we just ruined the biosphere, its capacity to support us and we get then massive migrations of humans causing wars and everything else. And if we try and actually beat each other with our military technologies, everybody dies because we have way too much military technology. that's never been true before war always worked out competing them for resource always worked, it will never work again. And so we're at a place where win-lose game theory equals stress.
Attitude, the word strategy means win lose game theory, how to be effective in a game that's like all military strategy and business strategy derived from military strategy, that's gone because that becomes omni lose-lose. So either we figured out on the win win, which means how do we meet needs while meeting the needs of everyone else involved in the biosphere without externalizing harm at all, either we figure that out or our species has finished its experiment. So, what does that mean from a we space is it means there is no other. So we actually have to get off in group out group mentality, there is no answer to making it through our technological capacity and existential risk without getting past in group out group mentality and having an all be in group.

Fernanda 54:00
So by developing the capacity to be together, capacity to trust each other, capacity to in these moments where we don't know where things are going, it's probably a good idea for people to be starting deeper relationships with one another. 

Daniel 54:15
And for all the people who thought Hillary was gonna win before the election, so for them to understand how badly broken their sensemaking systems were, that the world that they thought they lived in and the world they actually live in, they are not the same. They don't map and that if your sensemaking is not good, you are not adaptive at all. You will lose all adaptive capacity. And we put our sense making outside in the wrong places in your Facebook feed and in your you know, whatever. pundit you listen to that are not actually informed either. And so the thing that get is if you are bending it if you're doing in group out group stuff, right and whether it's the lean green Meemers or your out group or it's all right as your out group your capacity to actually improve things is pretty much none at all.

Fernanda 55:21  
Okay, I'm gonna take a deep breath with all that. I still feel the connection, and I don't want to say hope because it feels a bit passive, but connection to that place of opportunity within ourselves to come into this times and leave our own YouTube our own. Not I would say it was like Hollywood chose us all this dystopias and they seem to be fun and when were you talking about utopia said we would have utopic more be strolling, know where it would go, right? Girl I know everybody's happy. And as somebody we can hold that together that we can go into that curve that we can lift each other up, we can uplift one another, through the creation of community, to the creation of relationship with people that we don't necessarily want to relate with, or they're not the same as us or they don't share it excited values. But it seems that is the time for us to get over our edges with one another, and enter and try to do those with spaces with people that are not necessarily similar to us. 

Daniel 56:46  
This is the key part I want people to give. It's so easy for us to reach a point of what seems like fundamental disagreement, and then just disconnect. I'm not gonna hang out with this person for I'm not gonna hang out with this group of people or fuck them. Let's start a war or let's just ignore them, right? Let's just get rid of those people because they are simply bad to us. Doesn't work anymore. We actually can't win those wars because there's a lot of people that think that whatever that thing is, and they have exponential tech too. And as soon as you realize that we share the planet and we actually can't get the other groups off, then you say, fuck, I've got to actually figure out what is it that is meaningful to them and that they value and where can we build bridges and the whole just, I'm going to not interact with them and fuck them that just doesn't work. And so then you start asking more questions. And you open up your willingness and capacity for understanding.

Fernanda 57:55
So understanding bridge building, what is understanding of bridge building? Where are transition technologies that you see already happening, that people can start to be aware of?

Daniel 58:05
We're prototyping a very interesting process of sense making right now that involves human sensors. And I'll tell you one step in that. Partner mine forest Landry developed as partners is got a really beautiful insight. So, group of people come together for governance for choice making. You can't do choice making before you've done sense making because you don't know what the fuck to do. Right? And so one of the one thing we can say is that if your governance system involves voting, it's already broken. Because voting means that some things that are valuable are going to be benefited at the cost of other things that are valuable and we're going to see who values which ones more, again and an exponential curve world.
That just doesn't work whenever things are being harmed, and they're becoming catastrophic, and you polarize the people who are associated with the different values. So typically, when we have a choice to make, it's like, do we vote yes or no. And this proposition, both sides suck, because it was a wealth. It was an ill formed proposition, right? So either we get the we get the economics, but we destroy the environment, or we keep the environment, destroy the economy, we actually need to do a better job of understanding everything that is meaningful regarding this decision, and all that's interconnected first, and take all those as design constraints to an integrated design process. And so there's a sense making the proceeds of choice making and so part of how this process works is a group of people coming together to do the sense making regarding initiative, and let's say the, the issue is, do we build this bridge or not? Right, what is a adequate governance system or whatever? So we start with a whole bunch of questions. Right? We have a whole bunch of questions. That are relevant to answer this. And so the question might be, let's say we were leading one on governance itself, what do we think of liquid democracy? What do we think of voting currencies? What do we think of non voting systems? What do we, what are the strengths and weaknesses of dynamic governance or socio cracy? Or you know, whatever, right? You have a whole bunch of things where what when is meritocracy, useful versus consensus? So, then you have all these questions. And then people that are interested in those questions break off into small groups. And they ask a few questions related to that question. One question is, in order to answer this question, what additional questions would we have to ask? And there's a process it is facilitated? Well, I guess to answer that question regarding say, is a voting currency a good system, we'd have to say, Well, what what are the effects of voting systems at all and how do we define what kind of choice should be benefited? Or are there different kinds of choices that need different kinds of governance systems? And how do we relate it to sense things that you start to find? There's a whole taxonomy of questions underneath it that you just either didn't pay attention to or you assume the answers to. Now everyone in the group will have different insights as to what questions What is the level of consciousness and training of the people that are involved in order to be able to engage in it, how much civic engagement training is necessary, whatever it all these questions.
And then you also ask, what underlying assumptions are there and what is ultimately meaningful that this is trying to address? Now as you go around in a structured process, no one is actually giving answers anywhere, and no one is proposing strategies. They're saying this question has these other questions connected? And then everyone gets to be like, Oh, shit, I wouldn't have even thought of that question. Oh, that's interesting. And because we're not jumping straight to vote, you don't get pissed off that I want this thing that feels like it's going to take away from yourself. You get to say, Well, yeah, I guess spotted owls are interesting too. Right? If there was a way of doing it, that doesn't damage my kid getting a job. And, and oh, I guess I do have that assumption underneath it. And I guess this is actually what's meaningful to me will share the things that they said are meaningful to them are meaningful to me too. So in the process, not only does a huge amount of information gets surface that then can go into a choice making process that can lead to better choices, but all of the people understood each other better. And they actually understood how to do an aspect of we space better, which is they understood how to notice their own assumptions, how to notice what's actually meaningful to them, that is driving where their emotion is, and how to ask more questions and they became more you know, educated about the topic and they, after they do this a bunch of times, they start to take for granted that there's a huge amount of stuff they don't know about everything they're passionate about. And they start to take for granted that other people that are perspectives that they thought they would have different with actually have meaningful things to share that they didn't know. Via going through that process. So of course, we end up surfacing some sense making in the form of documents, but we surface sense making in the form of all of the people being better sense makers. Are you actually training a kind of civic engagement? So when you ask what are some tools or processes to be able to help people actually connect and relate better? That's one example. 

Fernanda 1:03:30
Okay, so it's like, trying to develop a little bit more sense making in the forms of questions, and then starts by asking those questions, and then helping people to actually relate first to that, instead of trying to get into the answers. And by doing that, they create some empathic connection because there's nothing to oppose. They're just questions. We're just surfacing that which we don't know. And then, but then how do you go from that because, you know, in the end, when we do collective intelligence processes, we can have all these huge amounts of data and this huge amount of harvesting, but I tend to think about it like in, in form of a spiral, right? So we go from the outside to the inside and the inside is where we want to find that answer to our question. And sometimes what happens is that people are not able to then see the whole of what is emerging in a way that makes sense, we can develop a huge map. But that doesn't mean people will be able to make sense of that map. So what is the process in which you go into that trend of huge amounts of data and questions into the actual more focus way of sense making from that to this seeing what you're actually want to see? 

Daniel 1:04:50
Yeah, so the second simplicity, on the other side of the complexity is actually an integrated design. It you surface all of this complexity, of questions and things that are meaningful and things that matter, right? That's ultimately going to create a series of design constraints. Right? For sure. And then the design constraints are going to be the beginning of a integrated design process. And the simplicity, the choice that's made is actually a design that meets all the design constraints. And so the future of governance and economics actually here is around integrated design. This is a really different thing. It's not optimization. And it's not game theory. So when we think of optimization, right, we we say, Okay, we have a system and there's a whole bunch of different needs that need to be met, and I have my government budget, my state budget, or my federal budget, and I've got military needs and healthcare needs and all these things where I have a company and I have our total amount of money, and I've got marketing needs and HR needs and product needs and r&d needs. But now, I'm going to allocate the resources, the same scare seemingly competitive resources to each of the different areas in light of what they'll be able to do in that area, how it all comes together that will create the best whole thinking about the whole, from an optimization point of view that we look for global optimum. When we look for Nash equilibriums, and things like that's kind of how we've done it. That will definitely not work moving forward. And big for a few reasons. One is when we think about optimization, we are assuming that we're dealing with theory of trade offs, that the same resource going to this area is taking away from this area and coming here is taking away from this one, which when you actually get into integrated design, where you look at the synergy possibility of how can these things be mutually beneficial? It's not about how much resource goes here and here, it's about what is it design that works for both of these things together better than the end of either of them on their own would have. And so, as long as we have underlying theory of trade offs, we will have people that are associating with whatever value metric they care about, particularly, and will continue to radicalize and polarize people just through the underlying theory of trade offs. So the key is not how do we top down allocate? Or how do we bottom up have a bunch of agents that try to find Nash equilibriums? It's how does everyone surface what is ultimately meaningful to them, and we take all of those sources of meaningfulness as design constraints. And then we go into a collaborative design process with the people who have the appropriate capabilities for that particular kind of thing. And a design that meets all the design constraints can move forward with consent.

Fernanda 1:07:50  
Wow. So that's how would you describe integrated design, when we go from the sense making into defining the side constraints, and then we find that most simple, elegant way of meeting those design constraints. And what about paradox? What about those design constraints that come from paradoxical sets of needs? Some people think they need this and another people think they need that. And there's like, there's opposition on that.

Daniel 1:08:20
So, always false dichotomy. And the key there is to move from false dichotomy into dialectic, and then synthesis on the dialectic. And so people strategies for how to meet a need will be fundamentally unreconcilable. But the actual needs will not be fundamentally unreconcilable. So we have to be able to tease apart the strategy for how to meet the need and the actual need. And so this is again, where we get into assumptions, right? There's an assumption that this particular strategy is the way to meet that need. And there is a meaningfulness, right what is actually meaningful here well. Okay, so my strategy to meet the need for freedom is laissez faire free market capitalism will know, but my strategy for the way of meeting my need for tending to the tending to the disabled and those who are in, you know, harder off positions and tending to the commons as Marxism. Well, no, that's like all the strategies and say, What I care about is individual freedom, and sovereignty, and the creative capacity of the individual. What I care about is the commons and the Commonwealth and those who are not in positions to be able to fully take care of themselves sovereignly being taken care of great, those are not in fundamental dichotomy with each other. But the strategies to fulfill that might be in fundamental dichotomy. So we come to what is fundamentally meaningful and ultimately, what we end up finding is that the same things are meaningful to everyone. That's not obvious at all. But everything that is actually meaningful when you strip the strategy way is meaningful. Everyone. Now that that's a process of revelation that we actually all have the same values, which is all of them.  Everything fundamentally valuable, then we get to say, how do we do an integrated design strategy that meets both of these things simultaneously and takes them out of being seen as paradoxical rights out of being seen as fundamentally dichotomous? Because we can meet them both simultaneously.

Fernanda 1:10:41  
I'm so happy you're in this world, Daniel. So how far is this initiative? And is there going to be tools or is there going to be a process that will help people to do the sense making and and you plan to release that process or is there a certain technology certain tool that would help do that. And in the in the beginning, I think I heard you say sensors, but I don't know if it's applies to sense making or to actual sensors.

Daniel 1:11:13  
So there, I was saying human sensors meaning that we're not in this particular process, we're looking at humans as things that have sensed into the world around them and can then share their sense making and then there's a way of being able to synthesize right harvest something as opposed to sense making from say, data mining on the internet or physical sensors, which are also important in where, you know, they those all need combined. When we start to talk about the future of infrastructure, physical sensors are actually a major part of a self adapting systems. The system, I was just sharing a kind of small group sense making process has gone through architecture, which is actually very non trivial as you're hearing. It's not like a small adaptation of holacracy, or sociology or some other thing, it was starting by reverse engineering from the actual social dynamic means.
And there's several different processes that was one of them, and just started to go into prototyping. And now there's a lot of prototype work to do. And I would actually love to have people from the, you know, collective intelligence communities, especially if they were interested in helping to develop these things further to do so because a lot of work is needed. 

Fernanda 1:12:45
Yeah, thank you. Yes, this as you were saying that, I was thinking about how to then enhance the capacity of the sensors, right. And how do you do that when you entering collective intelligence, because we can operate here and we can enter in through our fears or we can enter through our emotion or we can enter that we can bring our whole selves. And that's literally all the good and the bad and the ugly and the beautiful and so when you prepare a collective field, like if you think about the wee spaces, you part of over the practices are developing collective sentience on developing a way on, on how we connect to each other so deeply but also to the center to do that, which is bigger than ourselves. And then through that, when we have reached a certain space where where we're literally buzzing, like we literally feel the space is impregnated with our being together with our easiness in that particular moment of the collective and then we go to the mind, then more powerful things can happen and they feel that that when you mix that and they've experienced when you mixed with music, let's say that in a certain point, the group reach the limit of their sensing and then you bring an important piece of music or art or so that that you are meant the possibilities of the right brain and left brain interaction in the space and the body. So I would say that it would have to be larger than the mind it would have to involve all of who we are. So there are sense source, I really fully activated and that would mean. 

Daniel 1:14:41  
I think that is beautiful and desirable and not necessary for everyone to start. You're describing a kind of all level, all line, all quadrants, inner being right? Synchrony. Some people live in fairly narrow parts of their own being, in terms of what types of intelligences they use, and so on. If there's someone who is living in a really cognitive digital space without a whole lot of somatic awareness, they can still get cognitively. That there is no way for win lose game theory to work. And the interconnectivity and interdependence of everything and they can, to the degree that that is actually a basis of choice making for them, they can start making choices land with them, and they can develop those other types of intelligence. I say this because I find some groups that I connect with, should all do is get together and then all dance together and have a snuggle party and like connect them that way, then they do strategy. And there are other groups of artists who actually do really good strategy together just by starting with data. And so I want to make it as deep and rich as possible and as widely appealing as possible. 

Fernanda 1:15:35
Indeed, thank you, that addresses that we are unique, that there are these places for uniqueness, and then the places where certain groups. Yeah, you know, one of the recordings that I did on fury of the embodied we, with Eric Harris around our blog, there were speaking about certain practices like game shifting to make some boards that create collective awareness of where we are at. So it's like that immediate sense making while we are in process to know if we have bypassed something that that we actually wanted to agree upon in the, in the moment how help us keep our agreements in the field help us know where we're at, in regards to a process in any given moment. And jumping from example, from a facilitated fully facilitated group, to oh, now we're group facilitating, or now we're doing popcorn. Oh, now we need to to dive deeper in ourselves and connect vertically and we want to soar. So let's take a brief before breath before we speak and the strike to make the conversation so lower and that, but that you can dynamically do that. Right? So it's like, in a way you could have, you know, boards that could that could show that that could indicate where the collective is add in any given moment. And individual boards that could indicate where you are at in an individual moment.

Daniel 1:17:31  
Yes, and it's tricky, because when we think about complex, we think about complex adaptive systems and the kind of merging changing flowing dynamics that can occur, right if we look at bees and termites and ants and flocks and schools, like you mentioned earlier, they don't have prefrontal cortices and in the stigma genetic dynamics that do hive intelligence that can be that adaptive, all of the members of the hive are fungible to each other. There is no uniqueness of activity or role based on the individual, they all can do exactly the same thing. Which is why stigma works as a signaling system, because they'll all do the same thing to the same signal. It's also why they're fairly expendable as part of the strategy of the hive.
But it's also why they can count on each other to they can pretty much know what the one in front of them is going to do. Now, when we come into a situation, and people have very different learning styles, and they have different skills and different attributes, and so much so that we're into full kind of uniqueness of self, then I can't assume that these six people are going to operate at all the same as the last six and ahead, which is why command and control how anarchy has worked so well. So just fuck all that complexity, let's make a complicated system that we can rule and let's make people fungible. Let's make sure that everyone who's had an MBA can do these things, and everyone who's on the assembly line can do these things. But of course, that system is end of life, right? And, and running out. So one of the things I would say is that as we move into systems where we have to have more complex and inter dynamical, you know, relationships. Here, we've kind of learned to listen so much better and to communicate so much better, and to be able to actually adapt to different processes and different people, which requires real authentic full communication. And so this is where you're saying what is the development at the level of individuals needed to make those kinds of processes effective? And that is a lot

Fernanda 1:19:54  
We've been going on, and we could keep going on and it's so beautiful. But I want to name that last piece, just as you said a nice make it really pressed that we need to be listening better that we need to be then developing our sensing capacities, and our sense source and our way to receive signals so that we can become better players over that we space of that collective. And that is a beautiful challenge for each one of us. And a very possible one is actually a very fun one if you ask me.