So there's this very exciting confluence starting to occur between the emerging spaces of functional medicine and better diagnostic medicine, longevity, medicine and life extension, biohacking and quantified self technologies and citizen science, better science in all of the omics and various fields of bio science, neuroscience, and the bioinformatics capacities and the systems biology capacities to integrate all of that to really understand complex human bio psycho system dynamics better. All of these systems having exponential curves and all starting to have a confluence to develop a new emerging field of human wellbeing optimization. Six principles of neurotic collective scientific and philosophical approach to well being optimization. first principle is that we are focused on well being optimization rather than a disease model or illness state. We're focused on how to support More and more human flourishing, increased human capacity and resilience across all the physiologic and psychological dimensions that are important to we're focused on a whole systems and complex systems approach rather than a reductive approach where we look at individual pathways in isolation of each other and look for single molecule solutions. We're looking at the relationship between all the pathways within primary systems like nerve transmitters within a nervous system, and between systems like the relationship between the brain and the gut. And so we can support all of those systems together whole systems and complex systems. Three were focused on increasing the regulatory capacity of the whole system. 
So increasing system resilience and the robustness of its capacity rather than just affecting system state. So rather than try to get a biometric into the right level, we want to understand how the system regulates the biometrics on its own and how we support those regulatory systems. So the person becomes lastingly, more adaptive and more resilient, independent of ongoing utilization of the technologies that we've developed. For mind brain interface, we believe that the body affects the mind and the mind affects the body. And we can create positive virtuous cycles between those who are interested in developing technologies that are physiologic technologies that support cognitive and psychological well being, and psychological and cognitive technologies that support physiologic well being and specifically synergies between those that create virtuous cycles. Five, we are technology agnostic, we're interested in comprehensive at across the space of every kind of neuro technology and wellness technology that actually works that's actually effective, safe and meaningful, and then how to integrate all those who are interested in transcranial stimulation and biochemical technologies and microbiotic technologies, etc. And specifically how to be able to integrate multiple kinds of tech categories for optimized solutions for people. And lastly, six. How do we integrate all That towards progressively more and more personalization so that we can adapt solutions to individual needs and individual proclivities. Those are some of the foundational kind of approaches of how we work on well being science and optimization.