Dr. Hill 0:07  
Welcome to another episode of headfirst with Dr. Hill. Today's guest is Daniel Schmachtenberger, who's a co founder and R&D Director of the neuro hacker collective, which sounds kind of exciting. So Dan's gonna tell us all kinds of cool things today and dig into his history a little bit and some of the projects he's working on. So welcome to the show tonight, Daniel. 

Daniel 0:30
Thanks for having me. It's fun to be here with you. Yeah, happy to have you. So first of all, what is this collective of neuro hackers you are assembling? It sounds like a you know so pie in the sky big project where your head you're aiming for a lot of world changing goals, but can you unpack a little bit for us what your your approach here so by neuro hacking, we mean anything that can optimize the mind brain interface and the function there have. So this is cognitive and psycho motional and health and well being.
So we can roughly define it as well being optimization but even larger than that we think of it as sovereignty optimization, people's capacity to make good choices, right can be adaptive, which is a function of intelligence, of agency of sentience, all together. And there's obviously kind of human software, right psychology, human hardware physiology involved, and we know that the software hardware divide and humans is a plastic one, right? It's continuously in our affecting each other. And so, you know, your work with neurofeedback is neuro hacking. The other people you've had on the show, discussing meditation, etc, is all in that space. So we're interested in all categories of technologies that can meaningfully increase the homeostatic capacity dynamics as you like to call them out of the human neuro regulatory system and thereby increase people's capacity for complex thinking. Emotional resilience etc. And the reason why collective is anyone that is doing meaningful work here, we want to figure out how we can participate at a research level and a, you know, information product level, etc. So like us talking here together is, is awesome shape co sharing information in the space. That's great. So you say, sovereignty, it's an interesting way to way to frame that agency. What do you mean by I mean, what what kinds of things are bottlenecks to human agency that appear to be a mere affected by things we can do to the brain? Like what how can we affect agency in intractable ways? What are you saying what are you exploring? So by agency here, we mean, the the actuator capacity of a complex system, the ability to act on and in the world, okay? Send chances kind of roughly related to our scent, our sensory input capacity, intelligence to our information processing sensory input so that those exist in a closed loop take in information about the world, which is internal and external sensing, process it to inform choice, make choice, get that about that choice recursively, up regulate. And so on the agency side on the capacity to act, obviously, that requires the capacity to have good information and information processing. So there's good choice in forming it right it also requires impulse control. Yeah, you can actually have executive function and all that they know come to bear, it also requires the on the, you know, kind of choice making side of it requires the capacity to think through things using different frameworks, right critical thinking frameworks, systemic thinking frameworks, lateral thinking, etc. but also on the agency side.
Emotional resilience is a key factor so that as one is working with things and difficulties come they can process that physiologically and psychologically in ways that empower them to continue to learn rather than get shut down. And so when we look at the physiology of that, we know a lot about how dope mean about how adrenal hormones about how you know many different aspects of neuro chemistry and physiology are involved in one sense of drive one sense of reward dynamics that can predispose dysfunctional or more functional patterns of human behavior, increased sense of capacity, psychologically, physiologically, etc. So again, we're back to this somewhat soft division between the software and the hardware. So on the hardware side things, as you said, like impulsivity or executive function, I think you obliquely referred to working memory essentially, which is, from my perspective, the biggest bottleneck in human performance and one that appears to be the least responsive to change.
But also ways of thinking about emotional regulation and decision making criteria. I'm much more familiar with the physiology side, you know, the biohacking I do is the brain not the mind largely, what are you seeing as some interesting ways that we can get into cognitive change?
So the the psychological brain mind question, right, is at the core of the philosophy of neuroscience, the philosophy of mine the philosophy of science itself, right? Because the brain mind gets into the brain physics and the question of what is consciousness? What is physics? How do they interact? Is there bi directional causation? beyond the scope of what we're probably going to dive into here, but it's definitely at the core of what's informing the world we do now because how it in any model of philosophy of mine however we address this, it's clear that what's happening physiologically is affecting one subjective experience and what's happening one subjective experiences that is being mirrored on Earth, you know, affecting the physiology side. And so we can all be slightly modified brain chemistry the whole field of psychiatry is focused on this right psycho neuro pharmacology and not just pharmacology but neuro tech in general sure sure to affect cognitive and psychological predispositions and capacities.
We can also do practices that are involving one's direction of their own attention and subjective experience, whether we're talking about cognitive behavioral therapy, right, CBT DBT, other psychotherapeutic processes, or even what we call more kind of mindfulness processes of proprioception, paying attention to various sensations in the body parts the body and watch the changes as I'm sure you've done a lot of on physiology eg processes, and then watch the capacity for neuro plastic changes and the connectome with enough time and input in there. So it's not only that the division between hardware and software is soft, it's they are both co evolving all the time.

Hill 7:00
Interdependent and changing each others you alluded to.

Daniel 7:03
Yeah, yeah, I mean, I have to say I'm a reductionist in this space a little bit. So for me, the mind is simply the part of the brain that we are aware of and experiencing. And, and I, I kind of don't go below that I have somewhat of a Buddhist perspective where I don't really believe in consciousness. I believe in moments of consciousness, but not the overarching. I like if the brain falls over. From my perspective, that's it, there's there's there is no mind outside of the the corporeal boundary of the skull, so to speak, even though I know that there are non local phenomena that we're observing now in the brain, and I'm sure you are deeper into this idea of, again, the physics affecting consciousness. I've just saw a soft paper last week that showed that water has some strange kind of non local.
I hate to use this word but quantum tunneling in microtubules apparently, under some conditions, it appears like water molecules have a superposition and can be in more than one place at once inside of cells.
This is getting very quickly out of the realm of anything we fully understand. But do you think that we are getting to a place where we're starting to run up against the, you know, the edge of Wonder said science and we're often the quantum, you know, weeds or is there something here that we're making actual progress in in, you know, actionable understanding of the brain? Both. 
So, quantum mechanics brings us to the limit of understandability not just what we currently understand, but the upper limits on epistemologists measurability, even Yeah, and even beyond measure ability, the upper limits on ontology, right, then, Eisenberg's theorem doesn't just say, we can't know what it is because of measurement issues. It says. It depends on which interpretation of quantum mechanics but Standard Model interpretation. Its fundamental nature is not yet defined independent of an observation dynamic, that observation that subject object interaction or co defining at the level of quantum particles, very philosophically weird thing for us to think about using the intuition that we have from traditional larger particle physics. Yeah. Now, we have historically kind of written that off is just super weird phenomena that happens only below atoms and then cancels itself out at the level of atoms. And so we don't have to worry about it. The topic of quantum amplification are there quantum phenomena that didn't affect the behavior of things at a mesoscopic level [at a Newtonian physics level or] right. So this is, you know, the work of Stuart Kauffman. The work of other people at Santa Fe Institute of complexity science, the work of people like Stuart hameroff have really shown quite clearly that quantum amplification does happen, which means that the non deterministic, right? a causal phenomena at a quantum level are affecting macroscopic behavior at the level of brains that still follows public probability distributions, but not determinism. And so this is this is a very interesting, right very important weird topic and the whole topic of microtubules microtubules and neurons and specific and superposition dynamics and quantum information processing is one of the like, kind of interesting cutting edges in the field.
The work of Stuart hameroff and Roger Penrose kind of open that space up.
And the work of Dr. Honor bond, there's a few people kind of working in that space, and it is only scratching the surface of what we can claim to know well, but there's already application happening and things like transcranial ultrasound that were based on the philosophy from there that seemed to be having positive results. So it's super interesting field. 

Hill 10:55
Interesting. That's, that's wonderful. Thanks for unpacking that. 

Daniel 11:00
Just a touch first. I would say one more thing about the Buddhist perspective, the kind of john Searle idea that the mind is what the brain does.
This is one interpretation of Buddhism, right? There's different schools as yours, I'm sure very different interpretations here. Obviously, the foundational idea of what's real in Buddhism coming from Vedanta was that consciousness is what we actually have a stronger sense of no ability on then physics. Right? Sure, sure. And so their model was, well, I know that I'm experiencing something there's an experience or here I don't know that what I'm experiencing is what I think it is, but in an almost kind of Descartes like way, there is some witness that is witnessing changing phenomena, that is prime official real right. So their model was the was reductionist in the opposite direction, right rather that that consciousness is an emergent property of physics, which is where physicalism science has gone. I saw the rest of universe as either not real or an emergent property of consciousness. And that that kind of idealism physicalism divide is right at the heart of what we're figuring out when we're studying consciousness via objective methods and brain science. 

Hill 12:25
But correct me if I'm wrong, but you know, old school, you know, early poly Buddhist wouldn't consider consciousness a phenomena outside of momentary experience mean aneesha impermanence. The nature of reality is transients. So even consciousness the I always fall back to the metaphor, classic metaphor Ship of Theseus, you know, the thought experiment. Here's a model ship if I replace one plank, is it the same ship have it to have a three? At what point is this capital I self? The same if every seven or eight years all the molecules, my body are completely different and have been replaced? You know, this is where it fundamentally breaks down for me personally, terms of consciousness. But would the you know the vedantic approach say that there is a cohesive sense of consciousness or is an emergent property of just, you know, having a meat suit. 

Daniel 13:20
So, Sanskrit has a lot more words that have a lot more specificity in their definition than just consciousness, self awareness. And they're actually very key distinctions in their philosophic system. Okay. The, and again, there are different interpretations in the systems. But the Buddhists traditionally say that the foundation of reality is neither self nor non self because that distinction doesn't exist at that level, that the rational distinction of the concept of self other than self is more superficial than the foundation of reality, right? It's ontologically, less primary, okay, so the idea that it's non self, or the idea that itself are inadequate, so what we think of itself is self other than Self division. Right? They talk about a foundational oneness beyond division, it wouldn't be neither of those concepts, right? Not self nor non self. That's different than the traditional way that is spoken about in Vedanta, which is that at the foundation of all of it, there is consciousness with a capital C, that is, that is different than self. Right that can, which is basically if you think about it almost in terms of what a unified field of physics as a field of potentiality for dynamics to occur, quantum foam to emerge from, etc, that there is reference happening, but it's referenced within the only thing there is so there's self reference and that the foundation of what we think of as self referentiality happens at the level of unified field. Interesting. Now, I'm not saying this is what I think but this is some of the kind of interpretations there I will say there are real question. 
Problems with most of the models of physicalism. Their real problems with these models, and this is why these are unsolved, famous problems in philosophy and even see like, you'll see a couple physicalists like the classic debate that Sam Harris and Dan Dennett had, after Sam wrote his book on free will, was that Dan fundamentally said, consciousness isn't real, right? He's a radical limit to this. It's an illusion, but free will is real. And Sam said, consciousness is fundamentally real and emergent property of brain but free will is okay, this is a core disagreement on the most foundational concepts of existential ism of what actually is both being physicalists and having the same kind of critical thinking background and going on a lot of other things. So it's part of why these have been so hard as they're beyond our current tools of knowing or piston logic tools. When we do science. We are studying third person things. That Sure, sure yeah. So when we try and study consciousness, which is first person.
By looking at the third person CT correlates, we're actually doing a category mistake by assuming that they're the same thing. Also, when we assume causation when we get to the level of things that are, for sure via Bell's theorem, a causal, our intuitions get off, right. And so these are fascinating and tricky areas. What we can say at the level of what's probably useful for people right now, is that we can do things with our own subjective experience of self. So what we focus on what we put our attention, and the meaning we give to things that has a real effect on brain and physiology. And we can do things to our physiology that are not obviously utilizing our subjectivity that will affect our subjectivity. And there can be recursive effects between subjective and objective that can either depending on how you do them have the potential of being virtuous cycles and more adaptive evolutionary directions or vicious cycles.
So learning how to use both the conscious direction of our thought, awareness attention and what we do with our physiology in mutually reinforcing adaptive ways is I think what we're interested in here. Wow, it's quite heady stuff no pun intended. So these days like a philosophy guy here, do you have a philosophy background? Yeah. Yeah. Tell us about that. What is your What is your journey been there?
So, I was homeschooled growing up, okay. And all the sciences and all the philosophic traditions were what I was fascinated by. And so, our particular homeschool didn't have curriculum. So I just got to study what I wanted to know was interdisciplinary science system science and the various philosophic traditions because that the impulse to study science was the impulse to understand the nature of reality we live in sure better Yeah. Which is a philosophic impulse. Right. Science is a method of knowing that correlates to a particular philosophic system right now. office system usually of logical positivism or the idea that reality exists, objectively objective stuff is real, we can measure it get the same results. So science is a subset of philosophy to particularly useful, meaningful one. It doesn't happen to be an exhaustive one of all sure for sure. Yeah.
And so, I fortunately got to study many different Eastern traditions and Western traditions and my early and then deeply and my kind of method of understanding any new discipline is I like to start by going to the edge of what the hard problems that are not understood and you know, our belief may be unsolvable and then understand the range of opinions on that and why and then go back and understand the core axioms of the field in light of recognizing where they might actually have limits or injury. 

Hill 18:50
Alright, so let's so with that perspective with this lens into you, what are the hard problems you bump up against and enjoy bump bumping up against in the bio hacker neuro hacker world? What are the what are the Growth edges. I mean, I see people acquiring tools and technologies and ways of modifying their physiology and their minds constantly and I, you know, provide some of those tools. A lot of the time we're operating in space, we really don't fully understand, you know what we're doing. It's somewhere between art and science. And I'm sure half the things that biohackers do are completely irrelevant and a certain percentage is probably working counter to what they actually want to do. What do you find the hard problems are in neuro hacking or biohacking?

Daniel 19:35
So neuro hacking biohacking and what the hard problems are in medicine and we kind of looking at that as medicine moving from dysfunction to function, and biohacking generally thinking of it as trying to enhance function on previous baseline. We think of that as one gradient.
Some of the hard problems that are not like philosophically hard problems and In terms of maybe unsolved mobility or systemic limits, but like the holy grails of the space. Yeah. One of them has to do with complexity. Okay. And so, when we're trying to look at what's going on for an individual person say we're trying to look at addressing anxiety for someone is their anxiety, primarily physio genic, or psychogenic?
And what causes in each of those if we just look at physio genic physiologic causes, we see a whole good body of work on the ability for microbial imbalances in the gut to cause anxiety and anxiety predispositions because of decreasing the total amount of GABA produced in the gut or serotonin production in the gut or inflammation on the entire nervous system or whatever, right? So if someone went traveling, the third world got a parasite microbiome got off his never restabilized afterwards. That could be a tier one cause of anxiety that no amount of no tropics or CBT or DBT. Sure, yeah, yeah.
Or if they had minor head trauma, where the CAT scan or the MRI didn't show anything but maybe a QE g would more maybe a SPECT scan when there's, you know, functional patterns went off how we're going to address that, that might require neurofeedback, that might require neurogenic chemistry, right? That's going to be totally different again, if they were exposed to mold or other forms of excitotoxin Jor that can cause anxiety. So there can be genetic predispositions there and then you can, we can continue to populate. There can be methylation disorders, right there. Sure. Thousands of different things. And then the confluence of those things, right. And then if we're looking at the psychogenic side of it, we're saying someone who had anxiety since childhood because of kind of attachment, early childhood attachment stuff with parents versus only after a very acute trauma PTSD, like trauma. Sure. They're, they're different psychologically. They're different neurologically. And there are different best practices and therapies to address all these things. And for one particular person's anxiety, we might be looking at some confluence of some number of these factors, right, where there was a causal cascade, and then that person with anxiety maybe also has a sleep issue or not, or maybe also has some autoimmunity or so as we're trying to help them are we how do we factor all certainly complexity and personalization? 

Hill 22:35
Now is this possible? I mean, I work with brains every day and I am humbled every day by how little I actually understand and my strategy for dealing with that is you know, Maslow to man with a hammer every problem is a nail for my hammer, is neurofeedback and meditation and to some extent nootropics but I view the brain as a regulatory machine and and when I do a QA GNC something off and it matches symptoms, it's you know, it's a little bit more skill than being a mechanic. Perhaps but it's that approach. That's the let me go region when tweak this and see what happens. Um, I would I mean, I'm working on integrating lots of different information systems so that I can, you know, do visualization, do big data do a better sense of what's happening. But even that will have a fraction of the, of the degree of things you're talking about, right? Is it a solvable problem? Can we actually bring in personalized medicine if you will, personalized psychology track data this way? I mean, is this being done? Can we do it? I think we're getting enough information about the individual data points you can do a methylation analysis you can do a theta beta ratio, you can do you know a blood flow imaging or something. But these measurement tools are limited by the tool space that they are using and Q eg gives me one thing because me less than half the eg only the dipoles that are at right angles the skull and it's a 10,000 foot view population average of average D eg across several minutes. So you're missing states completely only emphasizing traits.
And this, you know, 30 or 40 big features in the queue eg that I look at, and then I operate on in terms of intervening. But it's, I default back to that, because I can't do everything. I can't hold everything in my mind. And I can't ask everyone all the right questions to tease out what might be going on because I just don't understand the brain fully. I mean, as you say, probably none of us do. Why are we getting to the place where we're gonna be able to aggregate and analyze and extract meaning from this complexity? Or is the complexity obscuring our ability to know what's real and know what's important? 

Daniel 24:50
Yeah, I do believe we are starting in the next few years. Okay, having an exponential curve. 

Hill 24:55
This is a kurtzweilian predicting here?

Daniel 24:58
Sorts in a different direction than thank much of what we hear about what is going to happen with brains from singularity. As you said, we can't hold it, you can't hold it on your brain, true. Total amount of information exceeds our conscious processing by a lot because of working memory limits, mostly right? Yeah, there's a storage limit in the brain as far as we can tell, but there is a working memory limit for your ability to consciously Yeah, try to make sense of not just how many different metrics but the relationships between those maps are real relationships. So say we start looking at the genome. Most things aren't affected by by snips right by one snip isn't very few things that are mostly we're looking at dynamics combinatorial dynamics across 10s or hundreds of thousand downstream effects essentially. Right. And but that's, that's a lot when you look at, you know, 3 billion base pairs. Yeah. And then we have to deal with the fact that that doesn't tell us which ones are actually coding. Right, and we have to look Apogee known for that, which is not something we do well right now. So we actually have to look at the transcriptome or exam, pretty much it all stuff that is emerging but hard. And and that's just the human genes and which is not actually the majority of the genes we carry around actually aren't ours aren't human. Right. 
So, if you think about it this way, right, when you're saying the brain is regulatory system, it's a top down regulatory system, right? The bottom up regulatory system is the code layer, the genomics the microbiome mix of ironic, right, they are creating a distributed bottom up regulation of individual cell function. Right and routine, Cody Sure, sure. That bottom up regulatory capacity is what led to the evolution of top down regulatory capacities. They get to control larger groups of cells and tissues working together and coordination, the feedback relationships between the bottom up and the top down regulatory systems and all the dynamics in between, is where we're what I think we're starting to do is map the human as a cyber organism, okay, right as a regulatory organism, apply complex adaptive system science and kind of Systems Modeling, to understanding that better and it is, what in computer science is called a NP complete issue. It's it's an uncomputable issue. Okay, there's an uncomfortable amount of information. Yeah, we're not just going to brute force, big data and machine learning and figured all out. 

Int 27:20
Well, it's a chaotic system, we have, we do not have infinite precision. Therefore, any model that steps into time, far at all diverges from the chaotic system. 

Daniel 27:30
And so yes, it's chaotic, meaning there's some fundamental unpredictability, there are measurement limits. And then there's, there is uncomputable complexity. And so what that means is, rather than just depend on brute force computation, we have to understand the dynamics of causation in a complex system better so we can compute the things that actually seemed like they wouldn't make sense to them, right. That's the modeling part I think the modeling part is key and that's it neuro hacker what we're really focused on is taking models like cybernetics, right, like complex adaptive system science, like information theory and putting what we understand from human biology and medicine into those more complex models to understand dynamics, better complex dynamics. And getting to the place where we can start to aggregate tremendous amounts of data there. And data that is, has progressively better sensitivity and specificity. And then be able to process that data where, you know, right now, for the most part, when we look at a biometric, we look at someone's hemoglobin or their vitamin D or whatever we're looking at in relationship to a reference range. Sure, but when we look at someone's someone has a kind of dynamic homeostasis, right? I actually really like it word homeo dynamics, it's a better word because the status is nonsense, as you mentioned. Sorry, I you know, I knee jerk response when I hear the word homemade homeostasis. Sure.
Wait, life is not status, we have these homeo dynamics. And then thriving health has to do with the homeo dynamic capacity and resilience across all of those homeand endemic axes. Right? aging is decreased homeo dynamic capacity across some of the axes. And does that mean decreased range of variability, essentially, decrease capacity to have a stressor, right, some things that trying to create deviation from homeostasis, and the ability to stay within the homeo dynamic range. So then, if which which means less resilience.

Hill 29:30
So to be concrete things like insulin or cortisol, right, what's the insulin rises when you consume sugar, right when you know that it's a signaling molecule cells suck up the glucose, insulin goes back down to chronically pretty sure the insulin system to the top of its range, eventually it stops varying.

Daniel 29:40
And we call that type two diabetes and on the way there that kind of sends ax dynamics where fasting insulin levels raise, you get insulin resistance at the level cells now, you take sugar in your blood sugar is going to go further out of balance no longer causing more effect on other systems that are affected by blood sugar. So more than pathophysiology. So we're defining here. Aging is not disease because disease we'd actually say is the deviation from homeostatic range or homeo, dynamic range where some metric actually goes out of effective range, and then you get a pathophysiologic cascade, right? So aging is not that it's the increased susceptibility for that. So it increases stability for disease because someone could have all of their markers within homeostatic state range, but more sensitive to them being able to go out of range from whatever stressors.

Hill 30:50
So they're less able to sit in the healthy basin of the face base, so to speak. 

Daniel 31:00
And so what we're interested in here is how do we wear someone already has disease dynamics going on how do we identify specifically what caused deviation from homeostasis? On which dynamics? What was the causal cascade that happened? And how do we specifically reverse it? like we mentioned with the anxiety? Are we? Are we key leading neurotoxins? Or are we fixing the gut brain access, or there's a very different things that require specific addressing of what the causal cascade was. 

Hill 31:30
So this is not, let's say, going to insulin, the insulin insensitivity that cells experienced after high levels of insulin, that's not the disease itself. That is the failure of the dynamic range. I like to call these diseases things like diabetes and Alzheimer's and other things because of the failure. 

Daniel 31:45
Now, there are some people who get type two diabetes who did not consume too much carbohydrates relative to what they burn, but they are deficient in chromium or vanadium that are necessary to actually have insulin processes at receptors. So there are other dynamics that can go on which is why we actually have to understand what are what is the entire causal phase space of what can cause an imbalance all the things that could be involved. And this is what what we've sucked at medicine so far, is dealing with complex causation. Yeah, acute causation. straightforward, right? So injury, pretty straightforward. And so we're going to be able to address that in a clear way. But where the causation is either delayed in time, right, so something happened, and it led to a slow deviation from homeo dynamics over the course of years or decades. It's hard to assess what it was, yeah, yeah. Where it's multifactorial, there's many different things going on, and where it's a combination of some multifactorial set that's different for different people. So I don't think Ms is a disease. I think it is. And I don't think Alzheimer's is a disease or anxiety. I think they are conditions where some cluster of symptoms and biomarkers come together where we call it that, but the actual causal ideology going into it can be radically different from one person to the next. 

Hill 33:00
So more of a syndrome, less of a disease a cluster of symptoms that may have multiple causal features interesting. I saw a study out of UCLA couple weeks ago that suggests Alzheimer's insulin insensitivity, if you will, can be reduced simply through behavioral mechanisms to a bunch of people off of all the meds off of anything and instead of doing a specific intervention, they said, let's do lifestyle things. And did you know paleo diets and exercise and lo and behold, symptomatic Alzheimer's individuals showed recovery of some function.
You know, this is fairly magical things. There was a study out a couple weeks ago showing that even in people with type two and type one diabetes who have no beta islet cells, essentially anymore in their pancreas producing insulin, short period of fasting if it was 12 or 24 hours a very short period seems to cause a real differentiation of non beta islet cells into beta islet cells to produce insulin right. 
That flies in the face of what we thought of in the disease model of diabetes, where it's either autoimmune or it's toxic from the sugar, essentially that kills in some person cells, once they're gone, they're gone. That does not appear to be accurate. Is this the kind of thing that you're visiting. 

Daniel 34:15
And the same thing with the idea that we don't produce new neurons, right? That was an old idea. And then we realized neurogenesis happens, and it can be up regularly. Okay. 

Hill 34:25
And first it was only in three places. And now it's pretty much everywhere we look in the brain, we're finding new yet forgotten stem cells.

Daniel 34:30 
And so can we increase pluripotent stem cell production and their differentiation throughout the connectome, and can we increase neuroprotection and synaptogenesis? And, yeah, like we're learning a lot about how that works.
Any, when you have a system that generated itself as a self generating system, the idea that it just could not generate those tissues that it originally generated, again, doesn't make them obviously it capacity to do it, and then the capacity decreases or turns off for some reasons. Those than likely are modular to turn on again, so sure, when we think about life extension, how do we increase progenitor stem cells? How do we increase the rate of purging senescence structures? How do we protect cells from senescence? These are all things that happen already. Sure they can start happening at sub optimal levels for a lot of reasons. We can support them happening at optimal levels and maybe even beyond previous genetic optimal, right, just to give us discrete example, is I'm a gerontologist teach courses on aging. 

Hill 35:40
There's a term in aging called antagonistic pleiotropy. The idea that a mechanism that is healthy at one point in life is harmful. Another point in life and the telomeres you know, the shortening and caps that prevent replication forever. When you're young, Prevents Cancer from running away with yourself. When your old keeps fibroblasts and your collagen from cleaning themselves up and they become homes for a pro cancer and environment basically. So it's this kind of thing where identifying where the natural arc of development may not be optimal for long term performance and turning these things back on and controlling it. I mean, from point of view of telomeres, you know, for a long time that was the course the holy grail in anti citizens now we realize if we could give everyone a pill to lengthen telomeres, you know, ridiculously it would probably just cause huge amounts of cancer.
So we can't simply reach in and turn one thing on I mean, this is something I struggle with in neurofeedback, it's not reaching and in dialing up and down different neurotransmitters or different, you know, brainwave ratios. What I perturb a system, the system he organizes and I'm never quite sure how it's going to reorganize. And this is, you know, a little frustrating sometimes.

Daniel 36:50
Well, so, if we think of it as increasing system resilience, right, how many it in that capacity, because it is a self organizing system and the complexity is well beyond what we're going to understand in a momentary view, right? We're never going to factor all of the dynamics happening probably even in one cell. But we can understand the dynamics that are involved in it's some of the key ones and its own regulatory dynamics and how we can increase it regulatory capacity. And so, in general, do we see things like redox signaling, decreasing inefficiency in cells? Yes. Yeah. So this is why all the nicotinamide right beside stuff has been so exciting. So if you can up regulate the energy plus NADH ratio, there's a lot of cool things that happen. Yeah. Do we see ATP decreasing inside of cells? Yes. Do all the things that cells do need those chemicals? Sure, yes. If we can support mitochondrial biogenesis if we can support ATP production efficiency and Krebs cycle up regulation, yep. If we can support protection of the mitochondria so they don't become senescent. Right. These are key things that what exactly is that going to do? Well, it's going to help the company Flex dynamics of everything the cells are doing happen better. And so I think those are one of the key things. So, you know, we were saying earlier, there are specific sources of pathology, right causes of deviation from homeostasis that we want to identify specifically in reverse, you have the djinns, toxins, deficiencies, etc, then there are general system dynamics that support system resilience and we want to support those, even though the effects of that are going to be general increase well being across systems. So eg regulation is going to produce, you know, how much is it going to affect a particular gastrointestinal sure dynamic? Well, it depends on what all the causal dynamics Yeah, it should move it in the right direction to the degree that it's creating better sympathetic, parasympathetic, you know, ratio dynamics, etc. Yeah. So we want to, in general, support the homeostatic processes that are fundamental, and get better at diagnosing individual sources of pathology and reversing them. 

Hill 39:00
This is great. I mean, this actually ties into how I often frame neurofeedback for people and they say, Oh, I want to do this. And I'll say, well, we're probably going to give you more resources and all the regulatory domains of sleep stress and attention. And what that means is resilience. And we can probably reach in and do more specific things for you. But let's see what happens first, when we bring the resilience way up and get you sleeping like a rocket will and being creative and flexible. Let's do that for the first few weeks. And then we can go in and try to target the thing you think you care about, right? And usually, the thing that they really want to work on sorts itself out along the way towards just filtering everything.

Daniel 39:35
The complexity of the interconnectedness of everything is, again why specialties have failed at complex illnesses. But it's also so fascinating because, you know, we can look at a structural issue, right, like a postural issue or osteoarthritis that's causing continuous inflammation within the inflammatory molecules, right cytokines can cross the blood brain barrier cause neural inflammation damage to neural circuits. Also where the continuous pain dynamic is causing sympathetic feedback into the brain, which then is going to cause effects on all the things the brain is regulating for axon perspective, right? And what needed fixed was a structural issue in a need. And or mold in the environment or a runaway process of dysfunctional information processing in the brain from a particular psychologic meaning making pattern, right? So can can structural issues in joints or psychological patterns of focus and meaning making or things going on in the gut or affect any other system in the body? Yes, this is what's fascinating. That's why trying to separate neurology and gastroenterology and oncology. Yeah, and so now it's how do we synthesize what we understand about the parts to understand what happens for whole systems and what happens across systems. 

Hill 41:00
So now you're doing this to the interact collective with this idea of bringing in different aggregate data types and modeling and trying to figure out what is the meaningful inflection points for these models where, you know, where's change happening? That's very, you know, high level and and those are the kinds of projects that frustrate PhD students for, you know, 20-30 years. Yeah. I think it's great. I'm incredibly noble pursuit to enter those big questions. I also know you guys are doing something a little bit more. Okay, here's some things we can actually do. There's a product you've produced called qualia, which is in the tropics, the nootropic space? Or is it more than that? Is that a good frame for it? Or is that too limiting? 

Daniel 41:45
I think that's a fine frame. As you know, the term nootropic is a little bit loosely defined in terms of how its general. I would, in general, start by making the distinctions between brain nutrient, no tropic and smart drug, which are commonly used kind of in relation to each other. Yeah, it's worth distinguishing. Brain nutrient means something that you'd normally get from a dietary source that's critical to some part of neurologic function that can often be at sub optimal levels, precursors like tyrosine, all your amino acids, fatty acids, vitamins, minerals that are part of neuro dynamics. And when we talk about medical deficiency, we're talking about a level at which acute pathology is happening below that level. There's a pretty huge range between medical deficiency and optimality Hmm, right. And so, we can call that subclinical deficiency or sub optimality. And so there's heaps of brain nutrients that depending upon what kind of tests we do we see in sub optimal levels all the time, right, okay, vitamin D is a pop. Sure, yeah. 
Even in Southern California, even in Southern California, and, and because it's not at a level for you know, rickets. Right. Someone has a, you know, 30 vitamin D traditional medical process hasn't addressed that but when we You know have deeper insight about where optimality occurs, it's a far way away which is why vitamin D supplementation is meaningful. same would be true with omega three or tyrosine or etc. So brain nutrients that are either hard to source adequately in diet or where modern lifestyle has used them faster so we're talking about Heidi or stress lives where B vitamins are in the process faster, whatever those are meaningful or if you're a vegan and you're eating anything has B vitamins in it so tight you know any kind of dietary limitation or anything so dress nootropics, starting with you know defining Prasad tammis field is some chemical that can increase some aspect of cognitive function beyond baseline without meaningfully negative side effects. 

Hill 43:45
Thank you for including that last piece, the the original definition, essentially, this is one of the axes I love to grind. You know, I'm all over the nootropic forums and things and I can't tell you the number of times I have to resist reaching through the computer and throttling some kid who thinks that modafinil's nootropic. Nothing with a with a significant side effect should be considered. And I'm guessing you have the same perspective I do if your performance is already relatively good. Why would you risk side effects for small incremental improvements, Supra baseline improvements, you're trying to remedy a deficit then. Okay, maybe you need to risk some things to get a problem sorted out. But I don't understand the incredible marketing and consumer push to seek for all of these drugs and compounds that have very, very significant side effects on the off chance that they're going to be, you know, designed for your sort of neuro chemistry and give you that little boost. I don't understand the the philosophy feel behind that, that this idea that you can, you can reach for something that might not be unilaterally good, just in case it might, you know, that's that seems very non nootropic you know, to me, so to speak. 

Daniel 45:05
So the topic of risk benefit ratio is core to Western medicine. Right? And it's partly why we only have a disease model and we don't have an optimization model is because in the disease model, there is risk to not treating the thing, right. Yep. Pain problem. So some risk of a treatment seems warranted. Sure. And you should make sure that the risk makes sense to possible benefit if people are already generally healthy. And this is also why longevity research hasn't, you know, had a lot of support until recently, or any kind of optimization, which has been left to biohackers is how much risk can we justify for how much benefit beyond baseline? Right? It's actually a really deep question, and it's a question that should be answered individually within a range that is reasonable for the field as a whole to pursue.
Now, I think bodybuilding and steroids is a classic example of this. Okay, so can people perform in fundamentally increased ways with anabolic steroids that they couldn't otherwise, obviously, right, you know, otherwise you wouldn't banned them in sports is. And you know, we're the people who are really pioneering this risking their health and if many of them experienced the downsides of that already, totally Yeah. And for them, at least knowing that quite clearly for many of them, it was worth it because that's what they wanted to do, right? Like the same reason anyone would do anything that was not a smart longevity decision for what they do. And then the field of steroids itself evolved from a lot of that experimentation to where the, you know, the sum of this arms today have, compared to the early anabolics have radically more benefit for much less risk. Yep. Partly evolved by kind of the citizen science happening in that space that just for ethical reasons, couldn't happen in summary, sure, sure. So it's a very interesting topic, right. 
And it is a place where citizens science is always going to be advancing the front edge. And I would say, all of the Psychonauts working with deep psychedelics are in the same place. And so one of the things we really like is for people who are, for whatever reason inclined to do their own research, give them better quantified self tools and learn from that if it's outside of what we can do formal research on and then, you know, be able to take the formal research from so crowdsourcing at a very big level essentially. That's great. Now with regard to what the appropriate risk benefit dynamics are, yeah. So you mentioned modafinil and take it further methamphetamine definitely increases certain cognitive capacities and it kills the flu virus. It has a number of positive medical potential. Yeah. And it has very real side effects. And so if someone is in a combat situation, and they need to stay awake a little bit longer, their math might make sense right? part of how those drugs were developed.
Yeah, for general use for your midterms, you know, it's not a good idea. Now, if we look at how much off label Adderall and modafinil and Red Bull and whatever, right, you know, happens for those purposes, this was one of the main reasons we decided to make quality was not only are the down regulation and side effects, pretty significant of most of those, but even the positives are fairly narrow. Right? So if you have, if you use it a presynaptic, don't mean agonist, right like Adderall, you will get increased focus, but you might actually get simultaneously decreased working memory, and we've seen on your studies, which is not the kind of total intelligence that we're interested in, as well as, you know, anxiety, irritability, depersonalization, all of those other dynamics. And then of course, because it's an external override of an internal regulatory system down regulation, independence, yep. And so what we're really interested, in what I'm sure you've been interested in the space was? Can we understand the system more completely and nowhere near total completely but more completely right? We're not just trying to a single molecule intervention, can we have a much more comprehensive set of positive effects rather than an arrow set, without the negative effects in real time and without down regulation, so that when someone gets off of them, they're not experiencing addiction come down, but if anything experiencing long term up regulation of the capacity of their system, so that's obviously that's the design principle with which we approach the whole space quality and all the products and development. So probably your first product then, yeah, What's in it? I haven't dug into the ingredients at this point. So brain nutrients and no tropics, okay.
And so as you know, when people start in the nootropic space, usually they dive into acetylcholine for sure, sure. And so rasa Tam's and some coaling donors like the foundation for memory augmentation, sensory nerve motor nerve, you know cutie etc. So but which Ras attempt to use are going to have a bunch of other differential effects interested and we're very different creature. Oh yeah. And also are we going to address the ability for the acetylcholine once it's produced to get across the synapse? Are we looking at acetylcholine esterase inhibitors? Are we making sure that the acetal groups aren't rate limiting for the coaling that's there that people aren't getting over cold energy. We look in different Coleen donors. Central phenoxy is going to act on the central nervous system more than the alpha GPC on the peripheral nervous system. If we look at the conversion of your dean, to city coline to fossae, title coaling, alpha GPC to acetylcholine, you're also going to get different peak plasma times when acetylcholine kicks in. 
So if you want to be able to have less of a spike and more of a continuous process, you might put a number of those so we focused on like with acetylcholine, we were looking at what is the whole acetylcholine regulatory process? Yep. And how can we address any of the rate limiting factors and make sure that we're we're acting on peripheral nerves where we're acting on central nervous system differentially more is what we want to be doing that the kind of pharmacodynamics and kinetics of should not just where it's acting, but how long it's operating for those curves are things that we really look at how much acetylcholine we're producing it so that you've also got not just siedel donors, which is why people love alkar right and see what carnitine and one of the reasons and routine does the Krebs cycle is.
B five is often a rate limiting factor for the synthesis. They see the late edition of coline. So, you know, what are the right ratios of those things together and then how much acetylcholine support for how much an MDA upregulation and then where do you get rate limiting effects in terms of the total cellular energy to process more acetylcholine. And then all of that just acetylcholine. Yeah, then we look at glutamate. And typically, it's pretty common that wrasse attempts at handpicking like properties, you know, many of them, certainly any rest and us and new pepped, which use now I always get confused new Pep seems to have race at him like properties but not be a race at him. I mean, I look at the structure and doesn't have a protein ring. 
That's correct. So it's called wrestled him like an American like okay, I was up regulating acetylcholine uptake in the nmea complex and up regulating glutamate uptake at the ampa complex, but it is actually not structurally either, okay, but it's very interesting. It's a precursor to cyclop Pro glycine, it is neuroprotective. Its anti excited toxic because of the way that it brings excessive glutamate outside of the synapse. So it's a very interesting molecule and new pepsin quality as well. Great.
Now there are plenty of things that we would have in quality if there was different regulatory dynamics. Okay. But, you know, so we're working within both the general well tolerated space, the effective space the and the legal space. People micro dosing, LSD or psilocybin has a lot of neat effects. We can't touch that. I'm not yet. So, actually that space of the appropriate legal categorization of medicines is it space that we have worked in and intend to more because it's important, so more political, legal and regulatory? Not the physiology but at the body politic. Exactly. Interesting. So when you look at acetaminophen being over the counter, as a, you know, legacy thing and the toxicity of it, compared to pot having been illegal for instance, still illegal in so many places for so long it's just nonsense right right right and we can look at the whole history of why those nonsense decisions were made but they're not just nonsense they're really bad for people yeah because pot doesn't cause liver damage and acetaminophen does and it but it addresses the same pain dynamics that people use.

Hill 54:15
Yeah but you can put a medicine it with opiates and that prevents people from taking all the opiates and overdosing in theory that's of course the Tylenol three vicodin and kind of approaches to bind acetaminophen to have what to to say hey, it's gonna kill you if you take too much. Don't take too much. 

Daniel 54:55
And so then people take too much and get liver damage. 

Hill 55:00
Right. Right. So sounds good idea but maybe asn't well thought out. Right. So it's been heady stuff. Daniel, thank you so much for sharing your wisdom where can people find out more about you? What other projects do you have going on? How can they dig into the Daniel this that that we have here in front of us a little more if they have had their interest sparked?