Interviewer 0:05  
What is neuro hacking? What is nootropics? You've probably heard this thrown about over the past few years. When people are talking about I take no tropics and my brain is working on another level. I'm taking these smart drugs, Scott, no tropics, you got to check them out. Maybe you've heard this in conversation, but you don't quite know what it is. You don't quite know what no tropics do. Maybe you don't even know what neuro hacking means. Today we're going to find out today we're going to talk to the co founder of neuro hacker collective, who takes a complex system approach to medicine and well being science. We're going to be talking about all the toxins that are in your living room and in your kitchen and in your life. How spending so much time indoors is affecting your life and what we can do about it. So we're going to get geeky. We're going to be talking brain health, no tropics, smart drugs.
Mr. Daniel Schmactenberger, great to have you here on the show, sir.

Daniel 1:13  
Thanks for having me on to be here. So let's dumb this down to the very simple, what is neuro hacking. Neuro hacking is a general term for any kind of applied neuroscience applied neuro technology for optimizing the nervous system optimizing the mind brain interface for various cognitive goals or psycho emotional goals primarily. We could also be talking about neural hacking for kind of sensory motor neural purposes or anything that has top down or logic control whether that's aspects of health and regulation, immune system longevity, but when we talk about neuro hacking in kind of contra distinction to the whole field of biohacking, we're generally talking about cognitive and psycho emotional tuning and upregulation.

Int 2:00
Okay, so, to the uninitiated, what did you just say? Because it sounded very interesting. It sounded very complex. What does it mean in a nutshell?

Daniel 2:15  
Tools for increasing cognitive capability, intelligence, focus, memory, etc and for increasing psychological well being awesome. Okay? 
What is preventing us from just being naturally gifted in our intelligence and having an optimized nervous system like what's going on today in 2017, as we're recording this, that's preventing us from from you know, having that kind of optimum capability, a tremendous amount actually. So, we, if you look at our interface with the modern technological built world, and you look at what our evolutionary biological history Is and you look at the places where they're suboptimal interface between those it's in almost every area. So whether it's eating food that came from top soil where the agricultural method had it deficient in micronutrients, trace minerals know where even if you're eating the healthiest foods that you can get access to you have fundamental nutrient deficiency and those are the nutrients that make not only all aspects of physiologic function but brain specifically, or whether we're looking at ubiquitous toxicity, like the volatile organic compounds that are in paint and flooring and so much, you know, carpet so much interior toxicity or external environmental toxicity, organophosphates, UPS Salix, you know most of the organic most of the toxins that we are exposed to and we see study after study of breast milk and mothers in the United States, having 200 plus petrochemicals those are those petrochemicals are either in the credit disruptors or carcinogens or neurotoxins. They have a real effect. Then we also have pathogens we never had before because of antibiotic resistance because of the amount of global travel because it's pesticide resistant. So as you share the effects of artificial lighting, the effect of the amount of time people spend in fixed postural positions with a fixed a focal links to a screen. So many of these things are things that we can work with. But our sub optimal to the human condition that's just on the physiology side. On the psychology side, most people don't have the connection to tribe that would have been part of the evolutionary biology if humans feeling meaningfully connected to other humans don't have a sense of connection to meaning and purpose have a level of stress from the worldview that they have come into, and from the macro economic system, and maybe from other macro global issues. So all of these are stresses on our physiology or psychology or nervous system that are going to have a sub optimal quality of life and performance. If we don't work with them.

Int 5:01  
It's fascinating. You're talking about, you know, the food we eat, probably the cleaning products we use in our kitchen or bathroom.

Daniel 5:10  
Staring at a screen obviously, I talk a lot about the dangers of looking at too much electronic light sitting down as well. There's a great book called Get up by James Levine which talks about the the problems of human sitting down so much and how that's affecting us.

Int 5:26  
And then I assume what you were talking about when you were talking about emotional capability was, of course, Dunbar's number of people I think was about 150 or 160. People when we used to be in tribes, that was the number but now it seems like even if we can if we're connected to more than that, which would make you feel like you were popular because you connect to 250 people, it seems to suggest that actually, you become less happy, the more people that you know, the more people that you're connected to the more people that you have to keep up with. So can we just break that down.

Daniel 6:00  
Let's just look at the food we eat for the time being like if I go to Whole Foods down on Fairfax and Santa Monica Boulevard in West Hollywood here, can I be sure that the foods I'm eating from the salad bar at Whole Foods or the kale or spinach I'm buying from the in the plastic bags are going to be okay for me or is what you're arguing saying, You know what? Chances are, it's still going to be pretty bad for you.

Int 6:29  
I don't want people to feel hopeless or feel you're about to make us feel hopeless.

Daniel 6:37  
No, I mean, is buying food that is from a farmers market or someplace that is local fresh are going to be a lot better than other sources. Yes, very likely is buying food that is organic, likely to have less pesticide residue and maybe more trace mineral. Yes, those were worth doing now, even in even in organic crops. We still find glyphosate and other organophosphate residue just because it's being sprayed nearby. Yeah, we find that and is the top soil going to have the microbiota and trace mineral density of what you know, an indigenous and primitive environment would have? No. So it's better, it is still not ideal. And people aren't aren't going to be eating the variety of foods they would in a natural environment that are seasonal and that are, you know, each pulling different minerals out of the soil and air. And they are going to have an increased need for certain nutrients because of toxins and stresses they're processing. So what we're arguing is basically, we we don't have an involved process for dealing with organophosphates, or glutathione on pathway or cytochrome p 450. pathway, none of those pathways were were evolved for dealing with petrochemicals because they weren't part of our evolutionary environment. And so given that we have the exposure to those things, it's actually important and beneficial to support our system to deal with the world happens to be in. So how do we ensure that we're eating the best quality foods and what's the practical way that we can do that outside of someone foraging or having a garden where they can really ensure that themselves. 
I would say, farmers markets are great because it's someone else having a garden where you can learn about the farmer learn about their methods, find one, like well, likely you can get something there that is, you know, less hours since it was harvested then at a grocery store, and outside of where that's viable, then going to local co ops and local health food stores is going to be probably the best, usually viable option. And then of course, understanding the different things that are in there, which is that not everything in the health food store is actually healthy and not everything that's healthy for one person is for someone else.

Int 9:00  
Is there one question that we should ask our farmer at the farmers market when we're about to buy the kale or spinach or the strawberries or the bananas or the fruit or whatever we're about to buy? Is there one question we should be asking? And one answer we should be looking for to ensure that we're giving ourselves the best opportunity to get the healthiest food we possibly can.

Daniel  9:21  
Well, you might have one question being that you framed it that way, which I'd love to hear, I would generally ask what what are their growing processes and practices? So I'd want to get into how they enrich the soil. What kind of, you know, do they use rock flowers? Do they use different kinds of micro ricean you know, soil and enrichments pesticides, proximity to other pesticides, how long from when they're harvested to get it in?

Int 9:50  
Obviously, the more one knows about anything, the better they can do to navigate that space. Okay, we're talking to Daniel Schmactenberge who's the co founder of neuro hacker collective, we're going to talk to him a little bit about a product that he has as well that's going to help you with your, with your brain and give you brain nutrients. I had a cleaner come to my home just the other day here in Los Angeles, Daniel and she was complaining that I didn't have enough products in my, in my apartment for her to be able to clean with. She didn't bring her own product. She she, you know, came and was reliant on me. And she asked me for next time that she came to buy a product, the name of which escapes me I think it was Clorox or something like that. And it was clearly like a bad chemical.  What products should I be buying to clean my home or to make available like what what kind of natural products because it seems like everyone's like, Oh yeah, I get this and it's like these vicious chemicals which are doing this. It seemed like permanent damage to our brains.

Daniel 10:58  
Just for a little bit of context. Ammonia is an amazing, beautiful chemical, right? chlorine is a beautiful molecule, all of the chemicals that we have developed I mean, DDT is a fascinating chemical right? into the better living through chemistry. The problem was that we didn't understand complex systems, we didn't understand whole systems. And so we understood one very narrow part of the system, we developed something that would be good for that part of the system, but it had other effects. Those other effects were called externalities, we started to understand those externalities and realize the problem of the externalities on both the environment and our physiology. So, you know, most of the pharma meds are actually really fascinating chemicals for the one pathway they're affecting, it's just that they affect other stuff, which is problematic. So it's not that it's not the bleach or ammonia or lime away, doesn't have some application where it's possibly beneficial, but we do want to be conscientious of different. Though those chemicals have effects on biology, that even breathing them have effects on biology after the fact. And those are they're not effects on biology that we want to have unconsciously. So you have companies like seventh generation and Heather's and things that people can get even in the grocery store that are more eco friendly, both from their effect on the environment and their effect on humans in the environment where they're clean. And then you have some companies that make really kind of high tech things, with high tech nature, tech cleaning products that can be very effective with different essential oils and saponify natural fatty acids. And so yeah, I'm not I'm not affiliated with any of the companies I'm about to mention, but seventh generation, certainly I have a couple of those products and I'm glad that you said that because that makes me feel good about buying them. And then there's the Honest Company, which is the company created by the Hollywood actress Jessica Alba and You familiar with their product so that the Honest Company products healthy as healthy as I can get as well.

Int 13:00
Daniel, I have seen them and heard good things about them, but I can't speak to the chemistry of my head. Okay. You mentioned global travel, how is global travel affecting our nervous system?

Daniel 13:20  
Lots of things I was speaking from the point of view of pathogens, which was before we had global travel, we had the pathogens that would have been within a bio region that would have been things that we had evolved immune system and microbiome to deal with well, and when we travel, we have the pleasure of being exposed to a lot more pathogens that we don't have innate immunity to deal with. And so there's of course beautiful things about our ability to travel and get exposed to other ways of looking at the world and, you know, people world views, but there are, there are other effects of that that we have to be conscientious of. And so the answer of just more vaccines for every place you go also has consequences.

Int 14:00  
And so it just these are, if we have a system that's going to be exposed to more pathogens and pathogens that it didn't evolve to deal with in recent history, well, then again, we would just say that's a place where we want to have more immune system support, just like we want to have more detox system supported for exposed to more environmental toxins. Let's highlight just a couple of other problems. And then we'll get into some possible solutions here, staring at a screen. What are the problems with that?

Daniel 14:29  
Well, beyond the backlighting and the lumens and the specific kind of the kelvins, the specific kind of spectrum of frequencies of light that I imagine your listeners all understand quite well. A few of the things that can be problematic about it is that it's a fixed focal length. And so if I'm looking at a computer that is 12 inches or 18, or however many inches from my face, then the focal length of my eyes for being able to focus very close and very far as not getting engaged in those are muscles. And in an evolutionary environment, we would have been not looking at a very fixed focal length for all that much time, right, we would have been looking further often seeing trees up close in the process of that dynamic movement of the eye musculature to be able to focus near and far as part of what helps keep that musculature healthy and prevent the kind of vision loss that we consider. So natural with age, it happened before computer screens with books for us, but fixed focal length for very long period of time. There's an easy solution for that, which is every 15 minutes half an hour that you're looking at a book or a screen, just look far away, you know, and let your eyes focus look at something very close your eyes focus so musculature stays engaged. There's also a postural effect of if I'm looking at a screen if it involves me not moving very much then of course, we have all of the neurological myofascial effects of just being very sedentary. But if the posture of the ergonomics themselves had me looking down and taking the S curve out of my cervical spine, the secret of my cervical spine.
You know, then I'm going to be dealing with those postural effects. So, computers are awesome. International travels awesome. And to the degree that we're interfacing with it for one set of reasons, but it's having other effects, we just want to understand those effects and know how to augment any possible negatives because I got a life span treadmill desk and I'm as I'm recording this with you now I'm standing on it. I'm not actually walking on it at the moment, but I, I now, for the most part work at a computer standing up and and initially, I thought I was so clever. But then I realized that I didn't have a computer stand on my desk. So my computer was actually down at kind of chest level. And so my head was kind of, you know, aiming down a little bit rather rather than straight. So here I was going, I'm so clever. I'm on a treadmill desk. I'm standing up, look at me. And then I was like, Oh, actually hang on a second. my spine is probably still slouching over because I'm looking down so now I have a stand and my computer on my laptop sits on top of that stand. And as you can see, I'm talking to you now Daniel, my eyes are at know my head and my posture is exactly the way it should be. I'm speaking to you from home on my couch on a laptop. So laptops are, are pretty profoundly so optimal ergonomics. And as much as we can say that we'd like people on not on computers, which is not necessarily realistic for what the work they have to do in the world. It's also meaningful for that we want them on ergonomically perfect computer setups, which when they're traveling is going to be hard at least understanding the dynamics one can counterbalance them. But for most people, the ergonomics that are going to be important is if you're looking straight ahead, meaning not down and not up. You would like to be looking slightly up from there if you're going to be in one place for a long period of time so that the natural see curve in the cervical spine is being supported rather than otherwise. So we're generally looking a little bit better. Then we end up getting the muscles in the back of the neck and the suboccipital muscles getting tight causing all of the kind of dynamics that come from that. And so if someone puts their monitor higher than they normally would, where the center point of their monitor is around eye level, and then they usually want their keyboard low and that we can get into ergonomic keyboards so that the shoulders are not at. That's generally keyboard low monitor high is a kind of first rule of thumb. 


I love it. Well I'm now you've inspired me to put my computer up even higher now. So I'm going to make sure I do that. When we finish this interview. Thank you for the for the tip there. Two more things I want to talk about.

Unknown Speaker  18:43  
Before we move on to a little bit more about neuro hacking, but we're talking to Daniel Schmactenberger, and you can check out what he does over at neurohacker.com. That's neuro hacker.com. You can read all about what it means to be a neuro hacker. 
Wi Fi, I love Wi Fi everywhere everywhere I go now when I travel, it's like I need Wi Fi. I need Wi Fi. We're all addicted to Wi Fi. When I was down in Sydney, Australia recently they've got free Wi Fi on Bondi Beach. And when I was traveling through the Baltic area and Latvia, Lithuania, everywhere you go is public Wi Fi free everywhere. I'm in my apartment here in Los Angeles. I've got the Super duper high speed Wi Fi just running through the whole place. What are the potential dangers of Wi Fi and all too much Wi Fi?

Daniel 19:33  
This is a tricky and harder to answer question. When we think about wireless transmission in general, so we're talking about EMF and RF, so we're looking at Wi Fi we're looking at Bluetooth, we're also looking at 60 hertz, EMF that is the AC in our house. We're looking at EMF fields from batteries, motors, etc. We're also looking at police signal transmission, military signal, you know other frequencies of radio. What we know is that the total amount of wireless energy that people are exposed to has been on the power law like Moore's law since the 60s. As we have had more cell towers and more satellites and more frequencies, we are doubling the amount of transmission that we're exposed to something like every 18 months. That means that we're in a very high number of order of magnitude more total wireless transmission than we ever were in an evolutionary environment. That that is going to have some physiologic effect is pretty easy to buy. That basically when you measure eg when you measure EKG, you're measuring bio signals, and that there's actually electrical signal processing that is how we work right the electrical signal processing is core to how our our nervous system works, that it's sensitive, and that all signals into perfecting all other signals through wave interference, exactly how it affects us. There's a lot of research this conflicting on. And different countries have done research very differently, largely based on the how big telecom is affecting the way their government does research. Very much like you, pharma effects of, you know, government funding research. So we're actually doing a meta analysis and structured review of all of the research done from all the companies, all the countries in the world right now on the topic of wireless transmission. And, you know, potential cancer effects, potential oxidative effects of sub ionizing radiation in humans and other biology. So we actually should have the best information on that topic available soon. But we still have a lot of interpretation to do. 
And when you're doing meta analysis, where the initial pieces of data that you're looking at are questionable to begin with, it's tricky, but I would say say that for people to be thoughtful about their exposure is warranted. And to take easy steps like not keeping your cell phone near your bed at night and not having unlimited amounts of cell phone and other access and turning your Wi Fi router off at night, just that easy steps one can do seem very well warranted. And anecdotally, many people who have left cities and went to places where they had almost no wireless exposure in deep wilderness, describe psycho neuro dynamics, especially sleep issues, but anxiety anorexia going away. Now whether that's just to being in nature is beautiful, whether it's the stress of the city, whether it's mom and there's so many factors that that's close to meaningless on its own. But we also notice a number of people who've put themselves inside a Faraday cages and found much better sleep. So I would say that research wise we don't know fully, but there's good reason to think it's something worth paying attention to.

Int 23:00  
Is it possible that 1020 years or two years or whatever, we're going to realize that cell phones and Wi Fi is going to be as damaging to us as we now know that smoking is, is to us for years, nobody realized nobody thought that smoking was bad for you. And then all of a sudden, in the 50s and 60s, it still started to sort of catch on, or actually, we're starting to see some correlation here between smoking and being unfit and heart disease. Is it possible that one day, not so long from now or a long time from now? We're going to wake up and go Damn, I cannot believe we were using the Wi Fi. I can't believe we're using cell phones. We were absolutely killing ourselves entirely possible.

Daniel 23:48  
I would say that it is probable that we will realize some effects that seem unacceptable to us with--I'm not quantifying how much compared to cigarettes--but some effects.

Int 24:00  
Now, cigarettes are pretty easy, which is we just don't actually need them, right? Wi Fi and just wireless energy transmission and not just wireless, but energy transmission in general, we're just not going to go backwards from that.

Daniel 24:15  
So I think one of the things that's going to happen is we're going to start realizing that just like, you know, we're not going to stop having cleaning products, we're gonna make better cleaning products, where we pay attention to how the molecules and the cleaning products actually interface with biology. I think we're going to start paying attention to understanding bio signals better. And what are the primary kind of eg EKG, cellular signaling bio signals that are most sensitive, and starting to develop wireless transmission thoughtfully in terms of the spectral ranges that it works in to how it'll interface with biology were like Tesla hypothesized that it could actually be a healing force rather than a illness worse.

Int 24:58  
All right, let's do one more. Before we move on to some talk about nootropics. And I want to talk about a little bit about qualia, which is a smart drug that you have developed. We're talking about you talked a little bit before about emotional feelings and the tribe. And I mentioned you know, Dunbar's I think it was 150 people, that's the tribe. How are we? How are we struggling with a either having too many Facebook friends or having being connected to too many people? Like what's what's going on here? How is this affecting, affecting us?

Unknown Speaker  25:36  
So, the premise whole just Dunbar took an observation that many people had previously, which is that most indigenous tribes capped out at around 150 people give or take maxed out around to 25 and a few cases, but generally 150 and then if they got bigger than that they would bifurcate or intentionally limit their size. And there's a question as to why and he found that there was a similar thing that happened in all kinds of primates, and that the size of the troop that could hold was actually proportional to neocortical volume. And the idea was that we actually have a limited number of unique relationships that we can actually process well. And so when we've got about 150, people, you can actually know everybody in that village well know their lives are history, what's going on. And that works. If you're going to have a village where everyone is going to impact everyone, knowing everybody caring about everybody being able to see in real time your effect on them is part of what makes social cohesion works. As soon as you start having enough people that you actually can't track everybody, then you start having anonymous people. And you start having people where if they're suffering, you don't kind of care as much and then you can have effects that could lead to them suffering but you don't care as much. You can't have social cohesion in the same way. Now obviously, we are not going to move back to a world of just Dunbar number tribes because you also didn't have to have a technology that only, you know, it's back to the technology of that time where you're only affecting that number of people. And obviously, our technology extends our impact and now global.
There's and there's actually what we can think of that was the first insight. There's multiple Dunbar numbers, which is numbers were different social dynamics occur one on one is the first, right, then small groups, three, four, then up to about 12, or 15, etc. So it's really not a problem, how many people you've been exposed to, or how many people you have friends on Facebook, there is a need to have some deep meaningful interactions with some number of people, which will probably be less than your total number of friends on Facebook. And it's important to understand the difference of in person deep, meaningful human interactions where you deeply know them, they deeply know you and you can be authentic with each other, then the kinds of interactions that are mediated all over social media. So stop focusing on trying to get 100,000 Instagram fans and Facebook Likes and start really going in and and concentrating on the quality of relationships rather than the quantity. 
I really want to say I'm a technologist. I am just about right use of technology, understanding all of the effects of it, I have nothing wrong with someone getting 100,000 likes on Facebook, if they're sharing a message that's meaningfully benefiting the world, and having more people here that that is actually making a better world. I just want them to understand that that doesn't equal deep interpersonal human connection, and that a bunch of people liking them on Facebook also isn't going to give them a meaningful sense of steam, it's going to give them some quick external reference don't mean hits. They can cover up the fact that something in their childhood didn't teach them who they were and made them externally referential for other people's approval about who they are, but it's not bad to develop a following. It just needs to be for the right reason. And if the reason is self esteem or connection, it's the wrong tool for that job.

Int 28:58  
We're talking to Daniel Schmactenberger, the co founder of neuro hacker collective. Daniel, what a nootropics A lot of people ask me about this and I don't actually have a very clear answer, but just explain to me what what it what exactly are nootropics? 

Daniel 29:20
Make a distinction between three different terms that are often used kind of synonymously but are worth defining differently. Brain nutrients nootropics and smart drugs. So when we think of brain nutrients, we think about nutrients that would be part of a natural diet that are involved in healthy brain function that either we might be deficient in or that we can actually utilize more of and it will, you know, meaningfully bolster our capabilities. So we're talking about vitamins and minerals and antioxidants here. So, to the degree that there are key nutrients, so when people are talking about the effects of minerals like magnesium or lithium, or the etc on brain function, or vitamin D, or phospholipids, or essential fatty acids, those are all brain nutrients that one would ideally get in a healthy diet. But because again, like we said, it's very hard to get adequate amounts of those in a healthy diet. And we have increased demand because today we're talking about B vitamins, we, to the degree that you're experiencing more psychological stress than you would an evolutionary environment, you're going to burn through B vitamins quicker. So supplementing the appropriate brain nutrients can be useful. The distinction there is that's going to take you from deficiency to not deficiency, which means your normal healthy baseline of cognitive and psychological function will be supported. It's not going to move you beyond baseline capacity, because those are elements that are part of the evolutionary environment, right. So smart drugs and no tropics are distinct in that they are not nutrients that would be part of a normal diet. They are some kind of additional set of chemistry synthetic or natural that are going to try and modulate some systems for enhanced capability. So no trophic generally means a chemical that can enhance some aspect of cognitive function, like memory, or focus or attention, or verbal fluency or task switching. So some nutrient that can modulate some aspect of cognitive function beyond someone's normal healthy baselines. Without meaningful side effects. That's the general definition of a nootropic. And then a smart drug is usually and these terms are don't have solid semantic definitions there. They're kind of slang terms, but I'm going to give you the best general definitions. Smart drug are usually pharmaceuticals that have some cognitive benefit generally for off label purposes. So either psychiatric meds like ADD or Ritalin or will be a trend or narcolepsy meds, like modafinil or Alzheimer's meds or Parkinson's meds levodopa, things like that, that can increase wakefulness increase focus increase, you know something.
Smart drugs can enhance some aspect of cognitive function that someone wants to experience and you know, hypothetically this could be not just pharma drugs, but any drug you could put cocaine or methamphetamine or other drugs into those categories where they do modulate some neurotransmitter like don't mean in a way that will have some cognitive effect. But usually, with some meaningful side effects, immediate side effects like they might upregulate focus but increase anxiety or paranoia or irritability or something like that. And they might also have long term side effects, which could be anything from like real physiological issues repetto toxicity or something, but also just dependence right addiction forming because they're taking something like dopamine or acetylcholine and glutamate or some neurotransmitter usually, that your body naturally regulates. And they're overriding the natural regulatory process to spike it. And in doing so, if you do that enough times can actually override the natural regulatory process where it becomes dependent on that exalted Venus in but that's what we call addiction.
Nootropics, the goal with no tropics and it's quite it's like kind of a, an almost like magic unicorn idea is that there are some chemistries that can be added to the system that can enhance some aspect of function without creating meaningful short term or long term side effects.

Int 33:51  
So obviously, the way that you're describing it, nootropics improve your cognitive function above your average functionality. Without the side effects, smart drugs, if we are to take your explanation, can also improve cognitive effect and they're good for things like ADD and Alzheimer's but they come with problems that come with potential short and long term effects and I think there was a third one their brain nutrients, right, I think you broken it into. Can you just explain brain nutrients again as opposed as that is different from the smart drugs and the no tropics, essential fatty acids, essential amino acids, vitamins, minerals, antioxidants, the things that you would normally get from food that either you're not getting enough from food or that it's beneficial to get additional amounts of based on what we're exposed to how much we're actually using our brains and the cognitive load. 

Daniel 34:50
So these are basically brain nutrients are either going to be things that could be found in food or things that could be found endogenously in the body that the body would make from food.

Int 35:00  
Gotcha. Okay, so you're obviously a proponent of no tropics of all those three correct. And brain nutrients, but not so much with the smart drugs? Well, again, like I said, bleach has a right application, and any drug can have a right application. But in general, there's such a profound complexity to how human physiology works. And complex means something different than complicated. The Eighth Circuit chip is complicated. It was designed externally, you put a certain number of transistors linked one particular way. A cell is complex, it's self organizing its boundary is non arbitrary. complex systems behave in fundamentally different and more organizing dynamic kind of ways and complicated systems. So when we look at human physiology, and especially the brain it's such a radically complex, self-organizing, dynamic, homeostatic system that we don't want to override that, right? 

Daniel 36:00
So if someone's dopamine is low, our goal isn't to just give them in chain dopamine or a dopamine agonist, it would be safe to say, well, let's see if we can understand the dopaminergic system better and see how to support that systems, endogenous regulatory capacity, so that the intervention that we're doing actually leads to lasting up regulation rather than short term stimulus and then lasting down regulation. So in general, for all kinds of inputs to biology, I'm interested in things that understand and that seek to better understand the body's natural dynamic homeostatic processes and seek to work with and up regulate them rather than override them. 

Int 36:50
Gotcha. Okay. So let's go back to near hacker collective, which is the organization that you co found, What is its purpose? What is its mission? And what is unique about its approach to neuro hacking and applied psycho neuro optimization?

Daniel 37:12  
Yea, so neuro hacker collective, our goal is optimizing the mind brain interface for the optimization of human experience in human capability writ large. And so we are technology agnostic meaning biochemical technologies that's both direct to consumer like no tropics and nutraceuticals. As well as things that could be you know, Doctor mediated for medical conditions and general things that are direct to consumer going to be a neuro hacking the way we think of it usually is not for curing illness, but for optimization well being supported enhancement. But a complexity approach and a systems biology approach to medicine is also very meaningful and part of the deeper research that we're involved in. But so, you know, we work with biochemical solutions. We work with microbiome tech solutions. We're interested in genomics solutions and neuro tech, transcranial lasers, Transcranial direct stem alternating current, you know, ultrasound eg neurofeedback, as well as psychotherapeutic and you know meditative technologies, working with the human hardware and software. We're interested in anything that basically can up regulate some aspects of human experience to have a better human experience or human capacity for any kind of person or condition. And the reason why this is so meaningful for us is all of the other issues that we care about in the world beyond human experience and capacity are affected by human experience and capacity. All the major problems that we see environmentally and socially, etc, are caused by human activity. And the solutions need to come about through human activity. 
So upgrading the comprehensive collective intelligence of humanity not just cognitive intelligence, but interpersonal intelligence, you know, etc. ends up being a meaningful lever for every other thing worth doing.

Int 39:17  
To that extent you've created your own product called qualia. And I'm presuming this is a nootropic, right. Yes. So tell us a little bit about what this is like to tell us a little bit about why qualia is a little different, and what typical experiences people might have if they take this product that you've created.

Daniel 39:40  
So like I said, we're working on a lot of different areas of technology, qualia is the first product that we have brought to market we have quite a few other products didn't trials that will be coming to market this year. And then some relatively difficult ones that will take a little bit longer but are are developing well. The goal with qualia was, when we look at the give or take $15 billion a year domestically in energy drinks and how much kind of caffeine stimulus happens and if we look at the estimated something like $5 billion and off label Adderall use not justified doctor Adderall use, which we can question if it's ever a good thing, but just people who are there midterms or finals or tech startup, whatever seeking that kind of enhancement, because there is a increased demand for productivity and cognitive productivity beyond what there's ever been well, having more things trying to distract from focus and, you know, also stresses on the nervous system, like we've talked about. The thing about Adderall and other smart drugs and just shit tons of caffeine is that while they can positively affect some metrics, which is why people use them, many of the other metrics that are critical are actually being downregulated in real time, so we can see for most people. When they're taking Adderall, that their focus will go up, their drive will go up. But certain aspects of creative thinking and systemic thinking and even aspects of memory go down, let alone emotional things like empathy going down, and then long term health effects. 
So we wanted to see, can we develop something that would meet the same need people's desire to be able to go into creative productive flow states where they're full cognitive capabilities were available? Can we do that more comprehensively than has been done so far and more safely? And we started by doing this in integrative clinical settings where we were running people's whole genome, we're running a lot of clinical chemistry, we're running brain scans, we're getting medical history, and we were really dialing in, you know, personalized chemistry for people. Then the question was, could we take some elements of that that would work across a bell curve of people and and meaningfully be able to affect them because personalized chemistry at scale is tricky. We're working on it, we're we're actually working on moving from the one version of qualia to multiple versions in the future all the way to, you know, lab based, fully customized chemistry for oncology. But we were really surprised at how well we were able to do taking a systems approach to no tropics where we were, you know, we started out by modeling when people are taking some smart drug or something to that effect, what do they really seeking, and we did the kind of the cognitive science of their, they're seeking to increase short term memory and long term memory and speed of memory and digit span and verbal fluency and task switching, and creative thinking and critical thinking, you know, analysis and synthesis and a bunch of emotional things like emotional resilience and drive. And, you know, so we're looking at the whole set of things together and then saying, right, we want to be able to affect that whole set, not a subset of it, and then what are the underlying physiologic pathways that mediate all that which ones are mediated via acetylcholine or glutamate or catecholamines, or ion channels or so we map that out, used kind of systems dynamics for looking at how those all interact with each other, and the and the pathways that regulate them. And then looked at the chemistry that maps to those, and then started our kind of hypothesis development process for what we could do to up regulate all of those systems simultaneously in a way that would actually up regulate the regulatory capacity of the system. Were after someone had been on it for a while, rather than get addicted and down regulated, it could actually have lasting baseline elevation. So let's just say I take qualia what's my first week going to be like, what's a typical experience of someone who uses qualia or in the first week and then you know, second, third, and you know, short term and then long term?
So we have done a bunch of internal you know, single blind trials, we're just engaged in our first double blinded trials right now, but we don't have results. I can't make any claim about what one will experience I can say what many people have claimed and many people is quite large numbers for us now. And obviously, it's going to be different experiences for different people. I want to say first, qualia is actually not recommended for everyone. There are contraindications. Specifically, if people are on psychiatric meds or neurologic meds, or treating cancer or treating hypertension, then we would not recommend people use it without consulting their appropriate health care practitioner first. This doesn't mean that there are not health care practitioners that are using it and recommending it for such people in knowledgeable ways. We wouldn't recommend people do it on their own because there are chances of interactions. So that said, for people that it's not contraindicated, we're getting an extremely high positive success rate. This small percentage of people about 16% of people that describe in a normal effective, they don't experience very much, are almost exclusively because they have sleep issues. If people are not getting adequate Delta sleep, so if they're not sleeping enough or not sleeping well, qualia will usually not work well for them because memory consolidation happens during Delta sleep. And we're specifically working with chemistry that is mediated through the memory consolidation pathways. So one of the things we say is, you know, that it that it really is critical that people are sleeping well, and if you have apnea, or nocturia, or something like that, probably going to need to address that first of the people who are using it and having good experiences.
There are testimonials on the website but increased focus attention, concentration, insight, actual emotional steadiness emotional regulation. Many people describing increased epiphany increases empathy. All of those things are fairly common.

Daniel 47:30
If you go to the website, you'll get a hint on the first page of what we're working on beyond what our current offering is. But mostly you'll see information about qualia. And there's a decent bit of information about the chemistry and the scientific approach that we use. And, you know, there's information that's worth looking at the blog has some very interesting articles. But what we're really working towards is being able to vet all of the different technologies that can meaningfully enhance people's psychology and cognition. This is everything from psychotherapeutic technologies to psychedelic assisted psychotherapy to, you know, all forms of neuro tech really vetting which ones are effective and that are effective, not just as short term and partial effects, but positive system of regulation. And then effective for what for what kinds of people for what kinds of pathway issues etc. Being able to synthesize all that and then being able to develop a platform where people can upload personal data that is synthesized with it, you know, unique kind of AI like combinatorially algorithms that can then be able to direct people to what technologies have the highest probability of being most meaningful for them for the kinds of things are willing to work on. And then being able to have a deeper version of that available for medical practitioners, really pioneering the future of personalized medicine where we can synthesize all of the diagnostics and synthesize all the therapeutics, customized therapeutics based on this kind of deeper, interpretive model. And so, we don't say too much about that yet. Because, you know, we want to share about the things as we're able to release meaningful offerings, but if you keep checking in you'll see more, that's way.

Int 48:46  
Terrific. Well, thank you very much for explaining the difference between nootropics, smart drugs and brain nutrients was a fascinating conversation. I'm going to make sure that my Farmers Market down on let's see what's what road is it on. I think it's on Saturday. Monica Boulevard, it might be on something else. Actually, there's a farmers market that I've been meaning to go to, but I don't go to it. Because I take the lazy route. I must hit that net. Hit that now and start asking the types of questions that you asked that you encouraged me to ask. So I appreciate that. Thank you very much for sharing your experience. Daniel, I really appreciate that.