Rachele 0:00  
Hi guys, I'm Rachele Brooke Smith. And I'm so excited because I have the creator and founder of qualia, which is one of my favorite supplements that you guys have probably heard me talking about, like crazy. And as you know, I only talk about things that I actually use love and really believe in. And I got to meet Daniel here at the bulletproof conference recently, and we had such a powerful conversation. And so I wanted to get him on to share with you guys what a little bit of background about Polya and neuro hacker and himself his amazing story. So you know, thank you so much for being here with us and I just would love for you to share a little bit with with the viewers about your kind of who you are and also why you created all that?

Daniel 0:40
Yeah, yeah, sure. Thank you, Rachele. It's fun to be talking to the end. Okay, so, neuro hacker collective is our company that's focused right now on a complex systems approach to mind brain health. And when we say complex systems, what we mean is, rather than try to identify individual parts of this profoundly complex regulatory system and say, Okay, we're going to change your dopamine levels, we're going to use one synthetic molecule, right? Wellbutrin and Adderall, modafinil, whatever to change this or to change your serotonin or how does the body naturally produce and regulate those molecules on its own? And if it's off, is it off? Because of a genomic issue? Is it off because of functional medicine dynamics that are going on in the person's body like pathogens, toxins? You know, is it off because nutrient deficiencies that off because of head trauma, like how do we understand how the regulatory system works and support it to regulate better make sure it has all the raw ingredients it needs, and the right regulatory dynamics So basically, rather than try to reduce health to what is one chemical that will override one pathway and produce one result, which is why modern medicine is really great at acute illness, and I'm really not good at chronic or complex things right. So acute injury medicine. allopathic medicine is awesome. In acute toxicity or an acute infection, it's awesome. But when we look at cancer, or neurodegenerative disease, or autoimmune disease or psychiatric illnesses, we actually don't have any cures for any of those. We have treatments, not cures. 
The reason we didn't have cures or even full peventions is because the methodology that is currently utilized and it's evolving this methodology is currently lies. Now, Pathak medicine doesn't know how to identify things that have very complex causal dynamics. So does too I mean, I mean, which I believe that's why I love talking to you so much is because of your background and studying complex sciences and how everything really does affects everything. And I've talked to this before with my audience and with you about how I grew up with a really, first of all, that little girl, second of all, you know, pretty, which led into a pretty big gut health issue. Which led into a lot of different, you know, both emotional ups and downs and, you know, weight gain. And I mean a ton of different things that I know, a lot of people today suffer from, especially, you know, gut health that they don't even know that they have. And they're just getting these symptoms like weight gain or mood swings, or, you know, a ton of other things. Right. That's why I'm so grateful. You on here, show me what you just said is a classic example of what you know medicine is moving into this but what has been eliminated as we, we take something that's as complex as the human body, which is profoundly complex, right, like 70 trillion cells give or take. And it's more than that of bacteria, yeast, virus, protozoa. And they're all doing about a trillion metabolic functions per second and the communications across and it's like, so, we try and divide it into systems like gastroenterology, rheumatology, oncology, right to try to understand those separately. Right, really normal separately system. 
So you were just describing a gut brain access dynamic or something that's happening in the gut can affect what's happening in your nervous system. And as we are diving deeper and deeper we recognize inflammation in the gut can lead to inflammation in the blood that crosses the blood brain barrier that creates neuro inflammation that can create depression, anxiety, neurodegeneration, we find that of course, nutrient uptake in the gut, whether it's absorbing nutrients properly or not. Those are the precursors to make neuro transmitters that if the tight junctions in the gut are damaged, so toxins get to come in that shouldn't from food that can go into the brain, the enteric nervous system, the nerves that are in the gut are actually giving feedback to the brain, neurologically. The entire endocrine system is affecting the hormone regulating system. So there's pretty much Yes, every one of the systems are interconnected very profoundly. And so you have to take a more comprehensive approach to support the regulatory system rather than try and override it and that's kind of the key. The key concept is rather than say, oh, something is out of range, like, for instance, somebody's blood pressures high, so let's give them a blood pressure med that lowers it. Well, this make it to where their body's own ability to regulate blood pressure gets even worse, because in the process of overriding it, we're actually overriding the regulatory mechanisms blood pressure. If instead of the person exercise, what's happening is their blood pressure is actually spiking higher in the exercise, which is triggering in a regulatory response to lower the blood pressure, which is why when people exercise mother blood pressure goes down. And so rather than say, how do we just the body's out of range? How do we put it back in range? We say know what's insufficient in the body's regulatory dynamics, how and how can we support those so it's self regulates better. And so in your chemistry, I don't want someone to have the same level of Dogmeat all the time at the same level of serotonin because sometimes you want to be hyper motivated. Sometimes you want to relax and your body should actually be able to generate those chemicals.

Rachele 6:00  
Yeah. And what I love to, you know, really go into too, and I don't think enough people really realize is how powerful and how connected the gut, your gut health is to your brain health, you know, and so many people ask me all the time, you know, how many sit ups Should I do every day? Or how do I lose weight? Or how do I get, you know, a six pack like you have or whatever that, you know, whatever the question may be, and I always say, it's so much more complex than just, you know, doing 100 sit ups every day. Like, that's just not going to get you to your goal. And I, you know, one of the first questions that, that I've learned to ask myself and other people is like, what's your stress levels? What's your sleep levels? Because so much of that, and also how much you know, sugar Are you eating as well? Or what's your diet like? Because all of those things have such a massive impact on either weight gain or mental health, mental clarity. 
And so how would you say that like, if somebody is, well first, let's get into qualia, into the actual supplement. And what makes it different than overloads? The neuro hacker right is the overall company, the collective, and so what's different? Explain the stream Polya? And also not sure. We're starting to ask question about what are the foundations of health and wellbeing and gut? Do you want to get into that? Because it's a simple answer. I do. 
Daniel 7:30
Let's get into that. First I think there's a very brief part. Medicine gets very complex in a hurry when you really start to study in a complex way, which is that the total amount of genetic differences, the single nucleotide polymorphism differences and me versus you is hundreds of thousands, and to be able to do precision medicine and treat that that's a lot. And was the person exposed to mold? And if so, what species of mold and you know, where is it lodged in the body and what kind of toxins have they been exposed to in pathogens? It's complex in a hurry. Yes, it's important to deal with that when people are dealing with chronic illness or have any kind of issue that hasn't been well addressed. This is what good functional doctors are for, and people should go find and see them. But there are foundations of health that address like most of the stuff for most people, if you don't have a really complex illness, this will be almost all of it. And if you do have a complex illness, this will still be the foundation. And so everybody knows what they are sleep, stress management, movement, and the nutrition someone gets in. And to really just say it very basically, all the repair that happens in any system of the body, pretty much all of it, like 90 plus percent is happening during sleep and mostly during Delta sleep. And so if someone is not sleeping, you're in the gym and you're creating micro tears in the muscles with those. The anabolic processes that are going to generate new tissue are going to happen when you're sleeping and taking nutrients, those nutrients are going to actually get to be integrated into neutral tissue tissues when you're sleeping. And if your immune system is fighting, you know, infection, that's when it's gonna happen. So sleeping enough and getting good quality sleep is foundational.

Rachele 9:09  
Would you agree that most people are overtraining and under sleeping and then causing? Or would you disagree with that?

Daniel 9:18  
Well, I mean, your audience is going to be quite different than a general audience. Most people aren't exercising anywhere near enough. And I don't think are that many people that are overtraining, I think there are people who are not taking care of their body well in the training process, meaning they're not getting the right reparative nutrients, they're eating inflammatory foods that make it to where they can't actually heal the micro inflammation. They're not getting enough sleep. But the amount that someone can train, if they're taking care of their body well is a lot. So I think it's less about overtraining and more about under regeneration and, you know, making sure their biomechanics are right that they are supporting the lubricity of their joints and warming up appropriately.

Rachele 10:00  
All that good stuff. Now I love that you said that and I guess in the in the fitness world and say you are you know, I just heard I've heard some people say, you know, I'm going to get up at 5am and get it like and get a killer workout at the gym even if I'm only getting three hours of sleep and I haven't slept at all and I'm super stressed out. If you were talking to somebody who was in that mindset, would you recommend amd say Oh, yeah, go workout before sleep or sleep before sleep more before workout or workout more before sleep? If the goal is weight loss.

Daniel 10:41  
So I would go back further and say, if there's a person who's only sleeping three hours a night, their whole life is fucked. And their priorities are probably in the wrong place. And we would want to probably comprehensibly changed her life.

Rachele 11:00
That's again why you know, guys, I think it's so cool that you're on here is that your way of looking at things is so much more broad than most. And so you have a you studied complex sciences right like work but let's talk a little bit about your your background and what led to the creation of Polya and neuro hacker?

Daniel 11:25  
I was always interested in me all things that support quality of life. And so, the psychotherapeutic side and the physio therapeutic sides. That wasn't really the primary area of my work, but I worked in across many different disciplines of science and then working across disciplines of science. It's kind of like neurology, gastroenterology that those divisions are talking about how do we actually understand what's happening across them? The same is like the best insights usually come at the intersection of a field like this biology and physics where you're taking pretty different perspectives on the world and being able to see what is true at the intersection of those right. So I study basically meta methods, epistemologies, methods of knowing for being able to understand complex things that require many different methods of knowing. So, complexity science is an example, you take complex systems like a cell or like a brain or like an ecosystem, and say, well, there's physics happening here. And there's chemistry happening here. There's all these layers of organization. And we can't separate out one variable and study it and isolation and think we know what the system does, because the system dynamics are a result of the synergy between all these variables interacting in the way they are. So the normal how do we isolate for a variable just doesn't work. And so complexity science is it is a type of it's a methodology for understanding very complex systems and you can't do variable isolation. 
So I had a background in how to go about setting complex things. I ended up getting diagnosed with autoimmune and neurological disease, and it was neither treatable, treatable, but not curable in the allopathic world or the integrative world. And it was rapid onset. And so I just said about studying and said, well, let's see if we can find some solutions because I'm, I, I'm used to studying how complex systems regulate so there's something off in my regulatory process. And so really like you that you didn't, you didn't know that was it wasn't a slow process. It was like I didn't know where you were diagnosed with that. Yeah, I was actually exercising heavily and started to get noticed joints, hurting joint injuries, and then all of a sudden within about a week, had immobility and when did the rheumatology sub autoimmune antibodies and those rapid onset so what happened was if you if you take a disease Like rheumatoid arthritis or ms or some complex almost like that. It's not.
It doesn't have one cause and it doesn't have the same set of causes for different people. What we're saying when we call it rheumatoid arthritis or whatever we're calling it Alzheimer's, autism, Indian those is that there are certain tissues or certain systems that aren't working properly, they're being damaged in certain characteristic ways that have markers. It doesn't tell us anything about the cause, which is why we don't have a cure. And so what we'll see is different things that statistically correlate. So in some percentage of people more than random, this infection correlates, but not everybody. So we can't say that infection is the cause of the fact that it statistically correlates more than random is like interesting. And in other people, it's this thing I knew there's a whole bunch of things. So I started looking for what is everything that statistically correlates with the conditions that I have that could be part of a complex causal set, meaning that each of those things decrease the body's ability to regulate itself, what we call the homeo dynamics of the body.
Then that makes us more susceptible to the next ones because we're already less well regulated. And when enough dysregulation occurs, now certain tissues start to break down or certain systems start to break down. That means that there's some set of things that are going on. That is not just one thing they might be, they might have happened in time, right? The food poisoning that happened where there was some lingering infection from international travel, and then the pesticide exposure when farming and then the head trauma, and the cumulative effect becomes disease 20 years later. So I looked at what are all the things that could be involved. I went and did very strange, obscure diagnostics around all that found the set of things going on for me, figured out how to treat those and reversed those pathologies, all autoimmune antibodies, everything changed. In the process started to get insight into how to think about complex illness and ended up being able to work with a number of other friends and people that had complex illness and see things shift for them and start to model a different way. 
Thinking about medicine as how do we identify the health of all the regulatory systems and increase the regulatory capacity of the systems. When we were doing it, we started to focus on neuro psych a lot, because pretty much everyone dealing with complex illnesses. One had a certain amount of depression and anxiety around it, and had a hard time with the motivation to do all the stuff they need to do to get well and they had brain fog and train too hard for them to learn. And so actually being able to have them think clearly and have the capacity to do stuff was kind of important early in the process. Well, I think that's just so huge. Especially, I mean, I can't remember people I hear all the time, myself included, this is a guy just like I can't think clearly or I can't, I don't have that ability to focus the way that I feel like I want to, especially in the world of distractions that we live in, like there's so much going on all the time. And, granted, some people are like, Oh, just make a choice and just decide, but I think there really are. Obviously there are certain things that systems are out of whack due to either stress or diet or not getting the nutrients they need. And so in the product that you that you created that I so love, and I've noticed such a difference in my life from taking, and then I keep raving about people, what makes this product so different than I guess anything else that is out there. 
So, qualia is broadly a nootropic, which means chemistry that's designed to enhance cognitive function, and to do it without any kind of meaningful downsides or side effects. That's in distinction to smart drugs. So smart drugs, typically we think of pharmaceuticals like Adderall, modafinil, vyvanse, Wellbutrin, etc. They're usually either a DD drugs or sometimes narcolepsy drugs or neuro degeneration drugs, and they definitely will increase some aspect of cognitive function like focus, but with some pretty meaningful side effects. And so I'm not going to talk about their medical use, but a lot of people use them off label, right, they just the black market on those is very high. And their use for midterms and finals, and, you know, whatever is very high. And, and the other option is read both, which is just, you know, tremendous amounts of central nervous system simulation, but actually not supporting neurotransmission happening better. And we wanted to develop better solutions for people because so many people do want to focus and be productive more than they feel like they're capable of. There's a lot of factors that are involved. But neuro chemistry is one of the factors. And, you know, if you think about like, Adderall or most most of the smart drugs that people take, not all of them but most of them are affecting the dopamine system. And typically what they're doing is they're, at some point, usually presynaptic dopamine agonist, but they're increasing dopamine in one part of the system.
Kind of overriding the way the body naturally produces doping, which is why if you stay on it for a while your system down regulates and then you feel like shit when you get off, which is, and that's right. And so we wanted to do something that was the opposite of dependence creating rather than override the body's natural capacity to regulate those neurotransmitters, could we actually look at how it regulates them support each step in the regulatory process, so that the regulatory system itself got better. So if someone was on it for a while and got off, they actually would have lasting benefit rather than have dependence and downside. And so that was one of our design goals. So rather than, you know, just override the dopamine system, create dependence but want to actually support the body's ability to regulate doping. And, you know, for those who don't know don't mean is one of the primary neuro transmitters that is involved in motivation.
Focus, mood, pattern recognition, lots of things. So talking about it being like your happy drug your internal happy drug along with serotonin and you know and even I mean I guess you use the oxytocin to you know, like, all those things that make you feel good and a lot of people you know that if you have low dope libido, serotonin levels like you're, you're not going to feel as good as if you do and I've gotten to a point where I can, I can really feel if I'm like I can feel if I'm like um, I don't mean as low as my serotonin is really low today. And even if I'm deficient in B vitamins like I've gotten to know myself so well from different you know, both blood tests as well as just self experimentation, it's like I can feel that and I just, my main message I really want to help people understand is you know, you there might not be something necessarily wrong with you or you might not be just to not give up you know, it could be as simple as if you got more be vitamins in your system not just taking them but also just knowing that you're actually absorbing them and that you weren't be deficient or D deficient, it could completely change the way you feel not only about not only your energy levels but also the way you feel about yourself and the world around you and your ability to handle stress and your body's ability to just feel lighter rather than like heavy and you know, I, I felt that before on both ends, and I just want to give hope to anybody out there that feels those feelings of either depression or anxiety or complete over exhaustion or inflammation in the body that there's absolutely hope I think why the best things I ever did was actually get a blood test that showed me: hey, you're b deficient, z deficient, hey, your plan is really low. Like it's really it's a lot easier to to help solve those problems as opposed to just feeling like you're, you know, there's something wrong with you or you're just having depression and there's no answers and you just have to live in a not great place is so not true.

Rachele 22:00
And I love that as you have navigated your own journey and found solutions to things that you were suffering with and then been able to, you know, have great success and things were meaningful to you that you share this with people. 

Daniel 22:15
Oh, it's one of my favorite things I think that is such a so much about who I am you know, like anytime I find something that helps me I just want to share it you know, and share knowledge and information and not from a place of this is the only way to do it. Because I do know that every single person is so different your metabolism or our body is so different so complex, like you said that what might work for me might not work for you. However, I that I really feel like trying things you know what I mean? I will try or test out you know, anything that if I trust somebody and they are giving me information to try you know, like I'm probably all you try it most the time I'm really grateful I did because it can drastically helped my life. This is why, if you were at the biohacker summit, that's the whole ethos. If we do a clinical trial on a very large number of people to see does does this drug or this therapy have some effect beyond placebo? That's a valuable piece of info but it's far from complete info because we're going to have a bell curve distribution of effects are the people over here had amazing effects that people over here had pretty shitty effects from the same thing. If overall the effects are you know, have some significance will put that drug out but to really be able to optimize for yourself what works well for you, is going to be quite different than what works well for someone else's. You mentioned this deficiencies might be specific, right or traumas might be specific or, which is why being able to do some self experimentation is super valuable and being able to find people that can help you both through the foundations that are true for everybody. And do the deeper testing as to what specifically is going on because living with backgrounding it and depression and anhedonia and meaninglessness is actually not natural to the human condition.

Rachele 24:00
Just maybe just something it's worth taking a moment on, is it if you go live with an indigenous people, there are not many left. But if you go deep into the Amazon, find the entre or whatever. They don't have mental illness, right? They don't have low grades.

Daniel 24:25  
You know, I'm even looking at that. Or even talking about that, you know, it's like, that's not that's not what we were, the human species was meant to have in there, you know, and well, as we've had all these technologies that have helped us become, you know, evolve as a species. It also there's, you know, the both can be blessings and also some really negative side effects to it. And I love that you're bringing that how can we use all these amazing innovations in science to help counterbalance those things? Think about it this way. When we develop a drug that is designed to affect one part of the physiology, it oftentimes the side effects are because it's affecting other things as well. And in ways that aren't positive and it wasn't actually dealing with the underlying cause. So will the Staten right old cholesterol? Yes. Is it also toxic to the liver in the brain and etc? Yes. So this is the problem. This is why complexity science matters is how do you understand what's actually causing what's going on with the causes complex? And how do you do things that are comprehensively positive not just positive for one thing negative somewhere else? In general, this has been the issue with tech is not just in drugs, we develop technology that is good for something and externalizes harm somewhere else. And then the result is a civilization that has a lot of things wrong with it. And so, like the paint on the wall behind me, it's cool to have paint and we didn't want mold to grow in our houses. So we started putting fungicides in our paint. And then the net result of course ended up being fungicide visit resistant molds that are kind of like the mersa. The antibiotic resistant, you know, mold species that are why so many people have mold toxicity today that never did before is because we actually made the molds.
And the same paint is putting out volatile organic compounds, things like formaldehyde, etc, that are neurotoxic and endocrine disruptors. And could we make paint that didn't have those things? Yes. But the key is the paint is affecting a lot more things than we thought it was. So we built it for one purpose. Well, it was affecting a lot of things and was affecting a lot of good ones negatively. So when you look at people's life today, their time on Facebook is the same thing in Facebook connect the world in some meaningful ways. Yes, it also make people who started creating click optimized personas that are not who they really are, where the more persona, the more that persona gets, like the more of a fraud and a phony they feel. The lonelier they get, the more they need to dope mean head from a blue to the screen like this is there's a lot of places where our world is a world that humans didn't evolve and they were not adapted to. And it's actually not good for us. And so one of the foundations for people to start thinking about is a lot of anxiety. 

Rachele 27:00
A lot of depression has psychological and physiological components that come from living in a world direction on adapting to in a digital world, right? And that's honestly why one of the shirts that I've made my company disruptive is called life before life, because I literally felt so were depressed like I did not like the way that I felt because especially as an actress, I had my my management team and agent team at the at the time was like up your numbers up your numbers, and all I could think about was either the obsession I'm like, What am I going to post next? Are people going to like it? And what if they don't like it? And let me check and see if they did it? You know what I mean? And I couldn't ever find myself to be present in the moment that I was. And I started just getting so I found myself constantly checking either Instagram or Facebook to see what other people are doing or what people are liking. I just hated it. And I hated hearing about all these amazing, beautiful women that I looked up to that were using body morphing apps. And like, you know, it was just it made me so sick to my stomach. And so finally, one day, I was like, I, I just can't take anymore. I'm just going to go on a social media fast. And I picked like, this one Sunday to just not touch social media. And I've done that since I can even remember. And it was one of the best decisions I ever made, where I actually felt like I had this connection to the people I was with again, and I were looking at a sunset being like, is there crying, you know, and this massive stress, which is lifted off, and I had done nothing different, but then just make a decision that like, I just wasn't going to touch that, that world today. And obviously, like I love you know, I think that it plays such an amazing piece in our world today of being able to connect people to be able to share messages to be able to create community. I mean, there's so many great positive benefits but I've also saw such a massive upgrade in my life when I have made a commitment to one not not touch, not looking at my social media or even looking at my phone for at least the first couple hours of my day, as well as at least once a week take like a whole most of the day, if not all of the day, just awesome it completely. And I hope and I challenge everybody that listens to this to really just try that out because I have so many people I feel like are dying for real human connection because we're so lost in this, the dopamine hits that come from, you know, the likes and the hearts and stuff like that. 

Daniel 28:00
So I want to explain a principle that I think will be valuable for people. There's a principle called hyper normal stimuli, meaning you're getting a stimuli that is beyond anything that would normally occur. And in doing so it desensitizes you to normal stimuli. And so this is why you know, cocaine is a hyper normal stimuli, there's really no way to get that much don't mean in a natural environment, which is why you feel amazing when you get it because you get this flood of experience. But it's also why been unique cocaine again and coming down from cocaine, sunsets are an interesting people aren't interesting like nothing else because the normal stimuli can't compete with a hyper normal stimuli. And the same thing is true when you're, if you get, you know, if you're skydiving, that's not a normal experience. And you can become an adrenaline junkie to the hyper normal stimuli adrenaline junkie, in a real sense, meaning the rest of life is actually not interesting anymore. And sugar is actually a hyper normal stimuli from an evolutionary perspective, because if you think about it in our whole evolutionary environment, the closest we got to sugar was fruit. Yeah, you can eat like the fruit we have now where you can just go eat a handful of you to pick the berries and they were thorny, and they were small and right. hybridize for their sugar content. And so because sugar was pretty rare because Scotland's return because fat was rare in our evolutionary environment, we developed a dopamine hit. Whenever we got it because it was evolutionary to try and get all of it, we could for survival. Now that we can produce as much sugar, fat and salt as we want, we still, we still predict huge dopamine hits when we get it even though we're not in deficiency anymore. We're in excess, maladapted now, but the other food doesn't taste good compared to donuts or whatever, when you have the iPad almost. Right? When you go to social media, if you go to a dating app, and you're swiping left and right and everybody's pictures are prettier than they actually are right like they've got makeup on and lighting maybe the wall Photoshop. And that's what's being selected for real people just aren't interesting anymore.

Rachele 31:44  
I love that we touch on this I mean, it's so puzzling because why is causing so much you know, either anxiety or depression or major self esteem, self confidence issues and people because we are constantly they're comparing on so many different levels to things that aren't really what is you know, it's like I love you to the heart hyper normal. And I felt that in my life so much even you know, when I go talk to schools, you know, talking to so many kids who have just people who have so much self esteem, self confidence issues because of social media and I've told them I'm always speaking as full of like, thousand girls the other day and it all said 100% of them said, we asked a poll like Have you ever felt that after looking on your social media and they all or wanted to look different? And every 100% said yes, in like a private poll, and I got up there and told them all I was like, Hey, you know, I'm, you probably see my photos. I'm an actress, like, just so you know, those photos there. It takes about probably two hours to get ready. I have a team of 10 people that are getting me ready. It's it's light and but you know what I mean? Like that it costs thousands of dollars to produce. It is not real life. You know, I think there's there's a place for it.

Daniel 33:00  
It's fun, it's cool, I get it can be so celebrated. But in a knowing that like, Oh, that's not really a place for this the same place as skydiving or cocaine, which is coke, cocaine is not going to hurt you if you use it very rarely. Adderall is not going to hurt someone meaning quickly you use it very rarely. And someone's not gonna become an adrenaline junkie if rarely they haven't experienced like skydiving. But these are things that will desensitize you to normal stimuli fuse them regularly. And so with powerful tools, there's a responsibility for how to use that tool so that you're that it's not creating unintended consequence. Yeah. And now the thing is, for anyone who doesn't know the work of Tristan Harris, go Google him. He was the product philosopher at Google. He left Google, said most all of my friends in Silicon Valley at Facebook and Google etc were like we're ruining your brains. Because your life will be better if you're offline in nature interacting with humans, etc. And we're trying to keep you online as much as possible because the marketers pay us more based on time on site. And so we have to figure out what is the most addictive shit possible to keep you online as much as possible and get you to click as much as possible because that's how the payphone works so crazy so crazy. Well, I celebrate him for doing that, you know, Dave, you for speaking is for anybody that's obviously causing positive disruption and saying look like this, these patterns and habits that we have that we've fallen into, like, are they actually helping you be a better person? You know, I just think we fall into these both like thoughts, patterns and habits that we forget to ask the question like, is this helping me anymore? Like maybe it did help me at one point, but like, Am I still getting something from this and if not, realizing that you can change it now you can make this responsible use look like because you might be getting something but you might be paying more than it's worth. 

Rachele 35:00
Yeah, and one of the key things is to notice the difference between addiction and something that's actually healthy for you. And whether we're talking about because this is true social media, it's true with drugs. It's true with food. It's also true that your size in terms of how one approaches it right?

Daniel 35:32  
In general, and addiction is going to give you a momentary spike. And then because it's makes you whether it's because it's spiking your blood sugar because it's chocolate cake, or you're doing it because it's cocaine or your adult don't mean endorphins because it's exercise, whatever, you get a spike, but then you also get a crash. And then you feel shitty for you craving something else that's going to spike you so you need more of that thing. And so you actually get more destabilization of baseline rather than a more stable baseline, and you get an erosion of your baseline over time, rather than an elevation of your baseline. So in this condition you notice when the person is coming down off heroin or coming down off cocaine, nothing other than that drug will make them happy. And so in that moment, like love is not interesting meaning is not interesting, only that drug is interesting because it's desensitize them to everything else. And so anything that is actually healthy for you, that makes you a healthier, more adaptive person makes you more sensitive to be able to get pleasure and happiness from more different things in life. And elevate your baseline over time rather than erodes it. 

Rachele 36:00
And so, this is just something that people should pay attention to, if I need this thing for happiness, and this thing might be a person that you're addicted to, right or to like the people you know, that understanding that even in you know, falling in love with someone all those chemicals are going off and had somebody. Even when I, you know, with one on one clients or coaching clients, even myself my personal experiences of like you, understandably just know that when you see a person that you're in love with and correct me if I'm wrong, but like, those chemicals are going up so you're literally getting dopamine serotonin hit from just seeing a person that you you don't have feelings from. And so they will go through withdrawals if you don't have that around anymore. Well, so there's a way of having responsible use there as a way of actually addressing that, which is a couple things. Most of what people call love is actually just addiction. And meaning. I like how I feel when they're around. I like how I feel when I'm on the drug issue. I really know who they are and I respect and admire and value and care for and want for them. And so I like how I feel when they're around is it actually yeah, and ultimate leaving you in the desensitizing and other areas of life become less meaningful. So and you know, stay in harmful, even harmful relationships because it's it becomes the drug. Yeah, exactly. And so the first thing is, is this relationship? Am I exploring the relationship without needing it from a place of wholeness, because we can create even more beauty together. And the basis of my draw to them, is actually seeing them not, not projecting fantasies on them because they're hot, but actually really seeing who they are, and wanting for them and we create together that way. If it's anything other than that, it'll end up being addiction. And even if it is that, if save to Google Form, and they start spinning, a lot of times together, and they start associating happiness with it, they have happiness and they have this experience with the other person. But as a result of them falling into this love bubble, they stopped doing things on their own. 
All their happiness is associated with this person because they're not experiencing happiness with their friends who they aren't hanging out with anymore or by themselves are not doing now they serve to create this Pavlovian association of happiness being one for one wired with them. Meaning I need them to be happy. But one of the key things is to be is to keep nourishing your individuality well being in the relationship so that you don't actually fall into it. Yeah, it's just so so huge and that that alone like they did talk for probably an hour just about I think it's so just powerful people to understand, you know, that everything you know, I think if you can get anything from this, this session is that so many things are are so complex or everything is so complex, you know, and it's not just one way answer and taking into account into all aspects of life and how you're living and, and more. So the intention behind what you're doing. I think it sounds like, you know, from what you've said, makes the biggest difference, you know, the mindset behind that. And that's what I talked about so much, you know, and all the different stuff that that I do is, you know, what is? What's the ultimate goal? 
Like, what knowing why you're doing what you're doing and having an answer that you're happy with from, from asking that question. It can be the life changing, you know, and yeah, so exercise can be a kinda Billy Mia where rather than eat the food and then puke with food, and then go workout real hard with self disgust driving the whole thing. Yeah. Or it can be a way of acknowledging that all the experiences I had in life are going to happen through a body and I want to take care of this body as a vessel for me to be able to create and enjoy and love. So it can either be an act of self love or Self hate exercise can be either. And, you know, for so long I was the first you know, I was more like maybe a mixture of the two I you know, but I just I remember being so exhausted already from you know being hours at dance class or hours at UMass or even just but hours at, you know just competitive dance and I was growing up we're acting class and then and then feeling like I was sitting in my car and just like using food as a distraction and I would sit there before I went to the gym and just like eating you know, just like snacking on things. I mean, like, just trying to get myself to get into the gym that I thought I had to go to, after spending hours and hours and hours doing physical activity, you know, but it was more of a place of like, I have to do this in order to feel good about myself as opposed to the opposite of like, I feel so good about myself and I love my body so much and I love my this this life experience like I want to be able to live it at all level. And I know that if I go move then I'll feel better, more energized and more you know I'll be able to experience life at a better at a higher rate. And I think that understanding I mean literally changed my life and and being able to take that into anything that you do you know, am I doing this from a place of self love or from a place of your art or or hatred, you know are discussed I think it's just is so so powerful. I don't like life saving honestly.
And so self love is a tricky topic just just be one part to it. For someone who is 100 pounds overweight, and they say I love my body, so I'm gonna exercise. Loving their body does not mean that they think that its aesthetic is exactly what they would like it to be, or that how it feels is exactly what they'd like it to be or even that they feel totally empowered. And it might not be those things at all. They might be you know, there might be all kinds of wishing something was different. That's fine to still say okay, my body like I really wouldn't be here having any experience having the capacity to create or to perceive or to love without having a body.
So that's, that's a big deal. And nobody's actually working like crazy all of the time to make me exist. And I do have the 70 trillion cells during a trillion metabolic functions a second and it would be healthier if I supported a better, right and so there's just a gratitude for it. And a recognition of the service that it is and then saying, okay, I actually love the thing. I love that there is this thing that gives me the opportunity to have choice at all, and I want to take care of it. That is just groundbreaking, you know, just even that mindset at all in the shift. And I've talked about so much before even what I call, what do you just did, is basically disrupted gratitude if we have given people a step process of not just saying okay, what am I grateful for, but also like, why am I grateful for it and what would it be like without it you know, how different would it be like if I didn't have this thing, you know, which can totally reframe and, and shift your whole perception on something. So I just love that you touched on that and everybody listening, like rewatch that part again, because it was so powerful. And, Daniel, thank you so much for being here with us and I know, you know, we get to go soon. But if you could leave the audience with just you know, one more thing, you know, to one more like wisdom knowledge drop, and what would what would you want to leave them with?

Daniel 44:33  
Oh, I'll say one that's relevant to the thread of what we've been discussing so far. And just to kind of underline the problem of hyper normal stimulus. In the process of addiction, we become less and less sensitized to the beauty of the rest of the world and more and more focused, hyper focused on the whatever it is we're addicted to. And where if that person is not calling us, nothing else. Really is going to fucking get our attention, right? It's just all about are they calling or texting? Or am I getting the likes on this thing? Or can I get my drug in the process of the evolution into more health and wholeness as a being, we actually increase our capacity to enjoy the beauty of everything, to get to have a sense of connectedness and to be able to derive pleasure from everything, our sensitivity to all of it increases. So a sunset is beautiful, the flowers are beautiful, being able to listen to anyone, there's there's a increased sensitization to the beauty of existence. And so if you notice that you are getting very hyper focused on a very small amount of stimuli and pretty numb to a lot of other stimuli, that's a good sign of being on the wrong track. And if you notice that most of life is doesn't do that much for you, that's a sign of kind of being on the wrong track and If you can start increasing the sensitivity of your perception to all that is beautiful, and decrease the dependence on those areas that you have had hyper focus, you'll end up having more net pleasure in life, even though it seems otherwise at first, and more happiness and more health.

Rachele 46:25  
I love that you said that, I couldn't agree more, you know, and from a very deep personal experience of the exact same thing on both sides. And, and why, you know, again, why I love the supplements that you created that because it helps. It has all the different ingredients that you have in there are I mean, guys that he created this from from this whole perspective into one, one thing that helps you, I mean, the whole, the whole company's name itself is to enhance life experience. That's what quality means right to enhance the overall life experience, which I love. 

Daniel 47:00
We, you know, we didn't really talk about calling that much detail, but the gist is we were people who were seeking more motivation, more focus more cognitive capacity. And not just a cognitive capacity, but the associated energy and emotional dynamics that would allow them to be creative. We wanted options other than going and finding psychostimulants and lots of caffeine that were supporting the physiology side, there's a lot of psychology that's involved, but the physiology makes a huge difference. And when your body's able to actually produce neurotransmitters, it functions the way that it's supposed to function. And so you know, that, that it's a part of a whole process. It's not going to work if you're not sleeping, and it's going to work a lot less well if you're eating crappy food versus eating better food, but it is designed to support people to have a certain aspect of neurologic health better.

Rachele 48:01  
When I, you know, like from my personal experience on it, when people know like I have always been somewhat on a constant quest for better health or to just how to live at my highest level, you know, like I get this one life is one body, you know, I want to be able to know that I'm experiencing it at the best that I possibly can. And sometimes I know we've talked about this before you know, even in that freezing of like the best you possibly can always feel like you have to be better than can can add a sense of pressure to oneself and something that I'm constantly working on just being able to be you know, shift from, I always got to be better I was going to be the best to just be like I just like we talked about disrupting that with a lot more just gratitude for being and that is a big shift. But I do know one of the what I'm so grateful for is that, when I've taken this product, I was able to have this this feeling of just a peaceful powerful, focused energy like never before and the things that I was experienced just seemed enhanced as opposed to I just felt this empathy and this this love for life again that I hadn't really felt in a while and probably because I had tried so many different pre workouts and like you know, like you said over stimuli that were there were me maybe messing up my dopamine serotonin levels and especially people who have gut health. I know that a lot of times that is affecting my dopamine and serotonin and all my you know, neurotransmitters. So having something that that helps counterbalance that. It's just been so so so, so helpful for my life and that's why I rave about it everybody. 

Daniel 49:50
What you just described was what we had in mind when we made it.

Rachele 49:55
So well, then I'm your perfect customer.