First of all
 I want to recommend a book first
 This book for you is called "Explaining Postmodernism"
 Is the work of Stephen Hicks
 You need to understand postmodernism
 Because postmodernism is what you need to stand up and resist
 And what you are about to stand up to resist is beyond your knowledge and mature development beyond your imagination
 Nihilism everywhere
 Intellectual attractive doctrine (doctrine)
 Has not publicly recognized that it absolutely dominates
 Humanities and more and more social sciences [and] universities, and what is happening? Who do you see someone once said?
 Unfortunately, I can't remember that it might be what Friedrich Nietzsche said: Everyone is an unconscious supporter of a dead philosopher.
 And fortunately, most of the postmodern philosophers are dead, so this is a good thing
 but
 This does not mean that their words will not be uttered by those who follow their trail, just like not everyone
 In view of the spirit of postmodernism, not everyone will be absolutely fascinated and saved by it.
 Because they often do not have enough knowledge and education to understand all the details about the environment in which they exist
 But if you put 20 of them together
 They are all influenced by five percent of postmodernists
 Moral concept You basically have the spirit of the mob, this is the "spokesperson" of that particular philosophicalism
 If you understand this theory
 Then you understand why things are developing in the direction it should be, so I will tell you something about this doctrine
 Because understanding it is not dispensable but understanding it is crucial you can’t underestimate
 The power of thought and the power of words, of course because thought is expressed in words
 But you see that postmodernists deny the system of Western civilization
 And I mean total negation, I can take Jacques Derrida as an example, he is the number one liar in the postmodernist movement
 Respect Western culture, let us call it patriarchy as the center, okay?
 So Phallus (penis) comes from the Greek PHALLO(s) (symbol of penis power and reproduction)
 So you insist that what you see in Western culture is a male-dominated culture
 Exploited
 Self-interested society, we can say
 Society does tend to be selfish, and those in power do tend to act in their best interests, but
 The trend is not absolute, this is one of the things that needs to be considered constantly
 Compared with any hypothetical utopia, we have no flaws in the rules of constructing society
 It is absolute
 A pessimistic misconception, but compared to the plight of other parts of the world and other societies throughout human history
 We did super well
 We should be happy to live in this world
 So maybe the first thing you should pay attention to about postmodernism is do they have even a little gratitude? And for those who are not grateful
 Talk about some problems
 Especially when they live in the best of all possible worlds, so if you are not grateful
 You are driven by resentment, resentment is the worst emotion you can experience other than arrogance and resentment
 Hate arrogance and deceit is an evil combination
 If you feel pain for everything that happens around you, even though you have countless money
 Then you definitely have some problems. You know that the black community in America is the 18th richest community
 Now that the 18th richest country on earth does not mean that there is no such thing as relative poverty and relative poverty
 This is important
 This is an important political and economic issue
 It is very difficult to deal with, but absolute wealth is also very important, and so is Western society
 Their productivity is absolutely outstanding
 By just looking around and thinking about it briefly, you can know what an absolute miracle is.
 Even buildings like this represent (a great miracle)
 So you have to educate yourself about postmodernism. This is what they believe: postmodernists don’t believe in personal power
 It is a symbol of Western society, a symbol of Logocentrism
 This part is Christian words, but it is also partly logical. They don’t believe in logic at all.
 They think logic is part of the process
 The patriarchy of the West continues to dominate and prove their dominance. Second, they don’t believe in dialogue.
 The word dialogue again means symbolism
 They don’t believe that well-meaning people can reach a consensus through the exchange of ideas [they] believe this
 Concept is part of it
 Philosophically
 Substructure and practice of dominant culture
 So they don’t let people who they don’t agree to speak in the university because they don’t agree to let people do it
 Say
 You see that it is not part of social morality. So, what else do they believe or not?
 They think that because people do not have the concept of [individual], your basic identity is cultivated by [group]
 This means you are basically a
 Your race is a representative of white privilege, or are you a representative of gender or race, or are you a representative of other such divisions?
 however
 You can be classified in order to use you to be placed in the position of the victim against the oppressor
 Because it’s a game and it’s a Marxist
 The old Marxist view held that the world was a battlefield between [them as capitalists] and [us as the proletariat].
 not any
 Philosophical or moral support
 The argument after the working class is actually due to the large-scale improvement of living standards due to Western corporate democracy
 [Western] Free Enterprise Democracy
 It is also the end, and it is also the result of the revelation of all the terrible events that have occurred in every bloody country
 Dare to be fair and peaceful
 A part of Marxist communism [dogma] whose basic structure only encourages brutality, depression, etc.
 It was obvious in the 1970s that that game was a postmark of postmodernist Marxism
 It’s just that there is almost no surgery, and it’s good for the rich if it’s not for the poor
 The oppression of the oppressor will only read that my subgroup will make us bloody
 Philosophy continues to move in its progress, and this is where we are now, and this is also true for postmodernists
 The world is a Hobbesian identity group battlefield
 They don’t communicate with each other because they can’t
 All these are power struggles, if you are in a group of predators, it means you are an oppressor
 Then you better look out because you are not very popular
 Not entirely popular, nor are your ideas, so [that] your objection. [I] would say it’s time for conservatives to stop
 Apologies for conservatives and no
 Don’t apologize to these people, it’s a big mistake. Apology they regard apology as
 Don't apologize for admitting guilt
 You don't back down
 Those young people
 Those college students, you need to be in charge of the student union. You have to take it back because it is an absolute lunatic asylum.
 They have been around since the 1990s
 About university issues
 I once thought that the best way is to cut the funds by 25% so that they can fight each other and leave the money.
 For residual factors, because it will force the university to determine exactly what is important
 What's not so I would say that the humanities and most of the social sciences have become one
 Postmodern neo-Marxist liberal playground bonuses are terrible 80% of the humanities papers have not been cited once
 Even once! ! This means they write papers for each other and sell them to the library
 [And] This is how publishers make money. No one reads them
 But publishers can print them out because the library must buy them and they buy them with your tax money
 So everyone here
 Funding
 Postmodern radical
 The roots of the neo-Marxist agenda are
 The university and your taxes are moving towards this goal, if you want to prove that you only need to go online
 Check the website, especially for subjects such as women's studies. This is the core pathological right, but not just for women’s research
 This is the All Ethnic Research Group
 It is anthropology, its sociology is social work, and the most important is pedagogy
 For example, OSZI is probably the most dangerous Ontario Human Rights Commission.
 Canadian institutions [it] should
 It should be withdrawn
 It’s very simple, because [they] did not conduct the research they claimed, and they were not interested in education at all
 They are interested in the indoctrination of young people because they are young and young enough to accept these wrong ideas
 [Now] we need to figure out our society needs to figure out how to stop
 If we want to give these public taxes to the right-wingers, we have to really think about how to stop public taxation to the radical leftists.
 There will be an absolute storm, but it has gradually occurred since the 1960s and needs to end! !
 So this is [part]
 Conservatives, not only conservatives, but also liberals, true liberals in the British sense are opposed
 I mean what happened, which is also the result of this postmodernism​​?
 The intrusion of neo-Marxist intellectuals is the center to keep going. It has now moved to the right
 Therefore, if you are a classic liberal, you will become a conservative, so for those interested in pursuing a conservative agenda
 There are many classic liberals to talk to, and the last one is to talk to young people
 You finally have something to sell to them
 You know that selling conservatism to young people is not easy because they want to change everything
 This is not something conservatives want to do, they want to maintain things
 So now you have something to sell to young people, you can sell to them free speech, you can tell them to sell
 Responsible leftists are selling their rights
 You can sell liability
 And I can tell you because I have received many letters: God is talking about young people starving spiritually
 Because some people tell them to have a sense of responsibility and say: Look! Here is something worth living for mankind
 You know you can find meaning in a free life
 However, freedom is a chaotic meaning, and freedom is not something that makes people happy
 This kind of thing makes people troublesome because
 free
 Expand your range of options, making you nervous and uncertain, but
 Responsibility is another, not that it is a bad thing. That's a good thing
 But it requires you to take responsibility for freedom
 But responsibility itself gives you the meaning of life
 Facing pain and your true meaning sincerely
 Young people are really starving. I have been teaching young people for thirty years, and most of what I have been teaching them is
 Responsibility, [it] is like you inherit a great tradition
 It is obviously not perfect [of course] but relatively perfect. Nothing else happened like this, that's it
 Represents a very small number of people
 Human qualities, most of which are
 Run by the vicious "antisocial psychopath"
 These thugs! Not that. . .
 Seriously, so what is the so-called substitution! ? Our western philosophy of freedom and wealth
 Is applicable. Of course, it doesn’t apply perfectly, so one of the responsibilities of young people is to find out
 What is the core of that greatness?
 The most important is the most important
 The power of the individual and the divinity of words, instead of selling the things on which the whole culture is based
 Well, I should stop there. thanks for your invitation