All right.
So let's do Russian hacking.
And what I want to do is I want to put quotesaround "Russian hacking" because we're actually
talking about a question of how we go aboutmaking sense of everything all together.
So "Russian hacking" is not an event as muchas it is a phenomenon that describes a very
large number of things that different individuals,depending on the particular location in the
social field, interpret differently.
So yes I think this is an excellent exampleof this new emergent mechanism of how we go
about doing social control.
And it's interesting because if you're lookingat "Russian hacking" from the blue church
perspective you're actually thinking aboutsomething that isn't actually how it's working
and you're going to be making particular mistakes.
So you will think I think, I mean certainlyI'm defining the blue church so certainly
if you are in the blue church modality youwill think that there is some kind of hierarchical
control structure with a small number of decision-makers,we will call them the Russians, who are principally
responsible for the behavior of the systemunder investigation.
So you are looking for an expertise hierarchy,somebody who is in charge and how their expertise
hierarchy is percolating downward in its downwardcausation fashion to generate the results
of what you're seeing.
And that's actually not an appropriate evaluationof what's actually going on.
Instead "Russian hacking" and the degree towhich there is a specific understanding on
the part of the Russians, which there certainlyis they're clearly, what is the phrase somebody
used—“punching up”?—They're clearlydramatically more effective right now than
one should expect them to be given their actualcapacity and power in the world because of
the higher quality strategy in this new decentralizedenvironment is I think actually recognizing
the obsolescence of that notion of a top downdecision-making framework where one of the
primary strategies is to find people who areoperating in that fashion and throw effectively
sand in their eyes, create obfuscation mechanismsthat cause top down decision making trees
to have a hard time either understanding what'scoming up to them or having their actuation
potentials move down while simultaneouslybeing part of a very large decentralized,
not centralized but a decentralized collectivethat is fluid and has an up-regulation behavior.
So modulating things like okay there seemsto be an energy and a focus and an ambient
interest among some group of decentralizedindividuals around certain ideas, how do I
provide them with an increase in localizedenergy or capacity to enable them to focus
in a certain area and engage in activation.
So it's more of a potentiation strategy andmuch less of a control strategy.
And then the other side of it, and this isa deep insight that I don't think anybody
is really grasping, including myself, is thedistinction between, for example, mimetic
warfare and information warfare.
And I think many of the blue church folksare particularly missing in on this.
Mimetic warfare is in many ways a legacy ofthe kinds of stuff that television does very
well: “Let me tell you a story which isdesigned to create an effect in you that will
move you emotionally and cognitively.”
And that, of course, changes and the natureof mimetic warfare changes in the Internet
domain and we've seen that broadly: Kids on4chan generating images that flow out very
rapidly and are selected for almost ecologically.
But there's also information warfare, whichis the recognition that you can actually use
very high-quality statistics and very high-qualityprecision to modulate subtle causation in
the environment.
So for example, I'll give you sort of a hypothetical.
Let's say, for example, my statistics toldme that there was a sensitive point in one
of the Florida districts where the likelihoodof decision making that say there was a 51/49,
we don't know exactly, is open, the possibilityspace was open on how that would play out.
And I could generate some kind of very lightweightintervention that would increase the rate
of traffic jams in that environment by sayhacking the stop lights so the stop lights
are on a different frequency.
And thereby decreasing the turnout and bydecreasing the turnout could probabilistically
affect that particular sensitive decisionpoint.
That's information warfare at a very, veryhigh level and the whole point is subtle,
very distributed, highly probabilistic.
It's much more like the way that one mightdo a distributed portfolio in finance as opposed
to a concentrated bet.
And that's another piece of this whole storythe kind of thing that the blue church is
very challenged to do because it's decisionmaking structure requires that it make a small
number of big bets, but that this new decentralizedmechanism can in fact make a very large number
of very small bets and they can be extremelyfine-tuned.
I mean the point is that you don't actuallyhave to take this “I’m super good at understanding
how to make complicated things,” which isthe older model, and just throw shit out and
just see what happens.
I'll throw something out, which kind of worksand somebody else will grab it and modify
it and it kind of works better, and somebodyelse will grab it and modify it and it pops,
and then a whole bunch of people up-regulateit.
So it's a collective search algorithm withthe ability to modify because remember we're
dealing about symmetry and communication.
So I can grab what you did, I can modify itand push it back out, and this enables a completely
different invention, construction and disseminationfunction.
I think that's fundamental.
Like if you're not understanding how to engagein that strategy you're going to be selected
against increasingly over the next even shortperiod of time like three or four years.