Hey, Episode 12. As you may have noticed, I've got my microphone very close to my mouth. So hopefully this will actually help solve some of the problems with vine. Before Josh gets the chance to can help me set this thing up more formally. And maybe I'll go this way so you can actually see how cool the microphone is. Alright, so Episode 12 I thought I'd do today is tackle the very fun and useful concept of phase space. This concept was actually referenced in the episode around the kineton framework. And at the end of this, I'll loop back and connected back to the kineton framework right now and just do free space on its own. So I'm Facebook's this, this take is our model a bicycle, and we're trying to do is we're trying to get a handle on how to model the relevant information that describes some kind of system. So in the case of the bicycle, we have about five fundamental degrees of freedom. We've got the position of the back wheel, we've got the position to chain we've got the pedals got the front wheel. We've got the handlebars. And, you know, absent for example, trying to do things like position, the bike itself and XYZ space and tea time, and maybe position the entire orientation of the bike in that time in that space is sort of handled. For more mentioned. we've pretty much done as I said, you got either five dimensions to get the space of the state and all those characteristics. or seven more dimensions, you want to really map this thing close, it was just the five. 
So now we just say okay, the degrees of freedom and use the dimensions well, nicely enough, the back wheel, the chain, the pedals and the front wheel are all just to start by surface, right, they go around and they repeat the same thing. So they're just, they're a model that describes and say 360 degrees, you can identify where they are at any point in time. And so you've got a variable that describes the the back wheel in terms of where it is and in its rotation around committers 60 degrees in the chain and the pedal of the front wheel. Now, of course, the front wheel also has the ability to have is a separate dimensional behavior, or you can you can turn. And of course, the pedal the handlebars do as well. So now what we have to do is we have to add another dimension for the orientation of the front wheel and the same dimension for the orientation of the handlebars, this is a 45 degree rotation. 
So now, with this set of dimensions and these set of characteristics, we have the ability to actually fully describe the state of the bicycle at any point in time. So I can take a spot and I can say, okay, given the state, so where around 260 degrees is the back wheel to change the pedal front wheel, where in the 45 degree are because that is the front wheel and the handlebars and that there'll be one point that is the Unity or the value of all those different dimensions. And that's going to be the state of the bicycle at a point in time. And then as I move forward In time, what I see is that that point will move right. So basically what ended up happening is the, the value of the 360 degrees for the back wheel will continue to go. As I'm pedaling, it will go around in a circle. And so on that particular dimension both describes what effect will be a circle, or they will go from zero to 360, and then return back to zero. And of course, this will happen across the entire system. 
So what I'll see is what's called a traverse through phase space. So phase space, is what describes as a word that describes the various dimensions that we're using. And the reverse is what what happens as you drive a particular point through physics. So as you ride the bike, you're going to be seeing changes in all the various variables and whatever those changes show up as is the point. And when you do that, with a normal bicycle, you'll notice a number of things we notice two things in particular one Is that you will notice that the back wheel, the chain and the pedals seem to be entrained, which is to say that there is some strict correlation, if it's a simple bicycle a very strict correlation between the states so that as the state in the background changes, the state of change chain changes, and the state in the pedals change and in some fixed ratio, so in some sense, they are the same, and they are entrained. 
Most likely, you will notice that there is more of a correlation between the state of the front wheel in the back wheel meaning that because they are not deeply deeply causally connected, although they are somewhat causally connected at the data, they're both on the ground and they both connected but the chassis, you'll see that there is a high quality relationship between the state of the front row in the back wheel, but it may not be as tight as the relationship between to the pedals and the back wheel. 
But when you will see is that there is a tight and treatment between the handlebars and the front wheel. And when you turn the handlebars What do we do left differently also turns want to be left if you've got a well functioning bike. Okay, so that's that's it like that's the concept. So So now let's take this and be a little bit more robust. So try to imagine constructing your phasespace to describe, say a horse. Well, you're going to notice, I think two things. The first is that it's an enormously larger phase space, because we're dealing with something which is, has vastly more degrees of freedom. So we're not just talking about say that the state of each the legs and the head and the tail, we might also have to model for example, the state of the blood pressure and the circulation of the pumping of the heart or the dilation of the eye of the nostrils. The total number of possible states that are necessary to describe a course is qualitatively enormous. Now of course, we can decide to do a sampling and we're just going to model say, the positions the legs and be done with it like it's simplified. The model a lot. And that's a very useful thing to do. 
But the first observation is if you're dealing with something like an evolved organism, you're dealing with just an enormous amount of phase space in comparison to a designed object like a bicycle. The second thing that you'll notice is that what you may not notice it, but I'll just tell you is that the phase space of a bicycle is finite and bounded, which is to say that, so long as it is still a bicycle, the dimensions that I just described is what they are, and the variables that they can they can take aren't changing. So you're not having 361 degrees suddenly emerging in your bicycle wheel, it's just 260 degrees and that's all it is. 
By contrast, in the horse to phase space, isn't that not bounded, meaning that in time in relationship to its environment, the horse can actually change the shape of his phase space, a new kinds of possible variables can emerge and Inside certain dimensionalities, let's say for example, the horse changes its gate in response to the environment that is in and this emerges is something that has never happened before in that particular horse or horses in general. This is all possible, of course it have that capacity. And in fact, in principle, one can actually imagine the emergence of entirely new degrees of freedom entirely new dimensionalities. Obviously, in the in the situation of evolution, we see this happen all the time, like the emergence of light sensitive cells, is entirely not that didn't exist, and then it did. And so to create an entirely new portion of facepiece, not just the diet guys that it can handle. And so the idea here is that now connecting back to the kineton framework, a complicated system is a system that has a finite and bounded phase space. So bicycles, and airplanes, a complex systems a system that does not has an unbounded phase space.