In this video, I'm going to try to take a hand at seeing how this thing works in multimedia, which is to say that I'm going to take a topic that I've recently addressed in text on a post called thinking and simulated thinking and address it here in video and see what the differences are. So this topic has to do with an effort to consider the different ways that people go about making sense of and responding to their environment. And specifically a distinction between what I'm calling, properly thinking and something else that seems to be quite prevalent in our contemporary environment that I'm calling simulated thinking. And the notion is, first and foremost, that inside the concept of thinking there is at least one Major distinction, I'm certain there are more but there's there's at least one, which is between an approach to the environment that is tuned to an adaptive to novelty, might think about this as well in the poster called explorer mode. So we're here we are listening closely observing closely, very little preconceived notions about what it is that we're perceiving. And in many ways slowly and carefully and somewhat lightly grasping things that are in fact not well understood, and endeavoring to come to grips with them on their own terms, so this is explorer mode. And then standing in contrast, explorer mode is what I called habit mode. So in habit mode, we have some framework for making sense of responding to our environment.
The example I used was after you've learned how to drive a car, the habit of driving car. So, very quickly, you can take your previously generated frame that has very crisp patterns that it can recognize and very specific responses that it can activate. And so, in habit mode, our our job is to do a good job at quickly recognizing predefined patterns and then effectively executing scripts for predefined and practiced responses. And so, these two modes are adaptive to different conditions. When we find ourselves in a circumstance of high novelty, then explore mode is the right approach and we find ourselves in circumstances of low novelty, then habit mode is a generally good approach.
Okay, so one of the things that I think I failed to do in the text was to really hammer home the fact that the distinction between explorer mode and habit mode is not the same thing as the distinction between thinking in simulated thinking. There are different levels of abstraction. So both explore mode and habit mode are properly part of thinking. Thinking involves the skillful and fluid application of these different tools in different environments, in some environments, thinking, sorry, in some environments, explorer mode is right in other environments haven't moves right. And oftentimes, when might actually go back and forth in the same environment.
This is all part of thinking. Simulated thinking I proposing happens when something breaks down this ability to fluidly participate in both modes and and maybe even more precisely, is when habit mode that shows up as and presents itself as thinking. And this is where it gets very dangerous. Where when the simulated thinking the individual actually may believe, possibly, quite honestly, that they are in fact actually thinking when what they're doing is actually running some kind of script, some kind of habit. And of course, oftentimes some kind of script that was not necessarily even theirs in the first place. They're running a third party script, malware as it were, and are largely for closed from explorer mode, right. So, simulated thinking is that kind of a thing is not as simple as merely just habit mode versus explorer mode.
Okay, so hopefully, that point has some clarity. Now, the next thing to think about is why why what is this happening and what does it mean? So, one piece to look at is that simulated thinking superficially outcompetes real thinking in certain kinds of environments, in particular environments that are static over an unusually long period of time, say over a great moderation, particularly when there is some kind of capacity to engage in Nish construction, or the agency of some organism is able to maintain the status of the environment they're in with their own activity, pushing back on the changes that are happening in the environment. So what ends up happening is that there's a feedback loop, once owned capacity to maintain the long duration of some nice for which a particular set of scripts were well adapted, then makes the use of scripts a effective strategy and the use of thinking, a ineffective strategy. And as a consequence, it becomes not possible to begin to optimize for using scripts and to begin to lose the fluid capacity to then use both explorer mode and habit mode. And this begins to move you into simulated thinking. However, by itself, I don't think that's enough. I think the next piece is crucial is to recognize that particularly in this kind of a static, perfectly artificially static environment.
Simulated thinking wins on a total basis, certainly in the short term versus actual thinking. simulated thinking is ability to leverage previously produced scripts and to deploy them rapidly. Looks at first, like winning visa v thinking which is going to be disoriented and slow and awkward and oftentimes like saying things that don't necessarily make sense or using terms and appropriately it's it's clumsy and of course, the longer a particular intelligence has been in a increasingly artificially static environment, the more this is going to be the case, right and effectively if you're, if you've forgotten how to do actual thinking, and everything around you has been teaching you to engage in simulated thinking, the act of waking up and beginning to think is, you know, going to be able to hear a toddler learning how to walk. And so somebody who has been very well trained as a bad dancer, in spite of the fact that they may not have done a single moment of innovation or creation in that particular formula, nonetheless looks unspeakably elegant compared to somebody who's beginning the process of a different to learn how to move their body under their own agency for the very first time. 
We see this actually quite easily in the performance art known as debate. You know, debate we normally do is very much in the in the direction of a habit mode and as a consequence, quite often fall into simulated thinking. It would a debater is engaging in a pattern recognition and rapid response activity with perhaps a specific small amount of focus thinking, controlling the structure. It's a bit like a military commander who's exercising over a very mechanical, old fashioned like Frederick, the great kind of military commander, very mechanical army. But nonetheless, as a leadership possession still needs to be engaging in some level thinking. So you know, in debate, we develop skillful perception of rhetorical strategies, and develop a portfolio of effective responses. And then our job is largely to simply deploy this repertoire. And it's habit where you practice it, you practice it vigorously and under intense conditions, so that you are like a good boxer capable of deploying it effectively.
And there's utility to this, I think we should be clear that the primary utility is investing someone in a social conversation and Does it at all conducive to collaborative thinking? So that what ends up happening is that when someone shows up who's actually trying to engage in collaborative thinking, and someone else deploys the toolkit of debate, the Bader will show up as winning, at least to those who aren't watching closely.
And the thinker will show up as being oftentimes, really rather stupid. And so nobody wants to emulate that. And so what is happening is that it begins to select against thinking in both directions, which is a people who are trying to think lose, and other people don't even try because it just looks like a bad choice.
And this shows up all over the place. You know, the political infighting is of this sort. Think about yourself like in an academic department where you have a distinction between a an earnest and perhaps somewhat unsophisticated graduate student who's really struggling with something difficult and a practice Cauchy, a junior professor who's quite skilled in the fine art of using rhetoric to out group somebody socially, or politics inside a corporate bureaucracy instead of boardroom, for example, these are all the same sort. And the point is that there's a condition under which we first begin to move into environment where simulated thinking becomes more and more useful and developing skills in just doing that becomes the way to be successful in your environment. And then also becomes more more capable of extinguishing, thinking, removing it from the field of play. 
And then this, of course, is a feedback loop. The structures that are able to do nice construction become controlled by those who are engaging in simulated thinking used to the structures to maintain the integrity of the environment for which they are well adapted, and as a consequence, become even more well positioned to extinguish thinking and to optimize for limited thinking and you find yourself stuck, you're not trapped in a particular niche. And this will last until it doesn't, because at the end of the day reality is ultimately changing. And so, even a very powerful control structures ability to hold back the waters will be overwhelmed by something something somewhere will ultimately burst the dike and there will be a flood of novelty that flows into the niche. And intriguing enough, it generally works in such a way that the the more that the niche was constructed. The the more that moderation was imposed by agency.
The more novelty will Russia This is a little bit like right now. But it's a lot like the relationship between the complicated and chaos that was talked about in the episode on the kind of inner framework.
So this is where we find ourselves now, we're in a circumstance where there has actually been a great moderation there has actually been a significant selection for a long period of time for simulated thinking, and a significant selection against thinking. And at the same time, novelty has been building up behind the dam. 
Massive novelty. And so the dam is now in the process of breaking. And novelty is in the process of flooding. And, of course, now what's happening is the Nisha shifting, were thinking and particularly the ability to enter into collaborative conversation which is where thinking is, at its best. is once again being established, as fit as adaptive. And simulated thinking is increasingly showing up as as error as glitch and in fact, is dangerous air, possibly even bordering on madness in certain circumstances.
And that's all I have to say about that.
I'm interested to see, for those of you who perhaps have read the post or meant for those who haven't your thoughts on the qualities of doing this video versus doing this in text is one more effective than the other. They interestingly, feeding back on each other. 
Is it worth my time to do both? And if you can help me with that, would that be great.