Unknown Speaker  0:00  
Hiding. It's been a long time, I finally have a few things to say. At least to I'll start with this one. And I will leave it to you to decide why it is that this seems like something to say in the context of the other things that I've talked about. So the notion here is something called cintas. The The, the concept was first introduced, at least to me, by Germany and Brian he knew and he was endeavouring to name the, the fact that there seemed to be a certain genius of a scene where some kind of scene would emerge, say like, punk rock, or skateboarding or Impressionism or quantum mechanics, where well, the individual participants themselves may in fact also be geniuses. There's something about them together or the emergence of the movement that seemed to have its own independent genius. And so he called that a senior and friend of mine gentleman named Sebastian Poquette was very interested in this concept and he and I talked about it quite a bit while ago actually but eight years ago it seems like and I was recently having a conversation with Tim Kelly and she recommended that I document the way that seven I were thinking about it so so this is it. Basically this is an expansion. 
You may call it the mike, how do scenes roll out because it seems that there's something characteristic about scenes. To begin with. A scene is very begins very vague. It begins as a feeling. It does not have any voice it cannot be said it cannot be seen. It does not have any symbol characteristics that are easily shared is a sense, almost a yearning of something that wants to be. And in the beginning, there will only be a very small number of people who are uniquely attuned to the scene, so as to be able to feel it enough as to be able to and attracted to realizing it in some fashion. So let's just use, I say Impressionism as an example. 
So you have your Monet, and there's some feeling in Monet that is orienting and and drawing him towards changing art from representational art to something else that has no name to it. It's not clear what it is isn't a technique or framework, but there's a sense of what is more right in this in this direction. And by doing this by acting on this feeling, he makes it more real, he makes it more concrete someone else who may not be able to be as attuned as he is, is able to see, water lilies is able to say, there's something there, that is now more clear to me. Alright. So you have a progressive development, you have a development of the vague and potentially very powerful sense of something that wants to be and then there's a people who are somehow uniquely attuned to this thing that wants to be and some of them then choose to endeavor to realize the endeavor to actualize it in their actualization. They make it more legible, they make it more perceivable they make it more real. 
Now, I would propose that there seem to be three core caught functions in this first realization. Now, these are functions meaning that a given person, they play all three functions or two or just one and certain people may may play these functions at different points in time. It is impossible in principle that it may in fact take a whole group of people to play a given function. So, so one function, I will call source source is the most in alignment with the essence of the scene. So, an individualistic for example, a particular individual happens to play the role of source, this individual is the the expressor, or the actual lizer of the scene whose expressions and actual actualizations are most fully of the essence of what the scene actually is. I'll get back to the source in a second. The other two I call the charismatic and the artist. 
The artists plays the role of making the scene legible to itself. The artist is kind of developing the palette of expressions that are signature characteristics of what the scene really is. Say for example, you know the the use of color and light and Impressionism as part of the artistry of the palette of what it is to be an impressionist painting Morty in skateboarding, the skateboarding scene, it is perhaps the, the the innovation of the ollie is a expansion of the expressive palette of the scene itself. So the symbolic language or the Pattern Language in its increasing a sprig expressivity is the domain of artistry. The charismatic is the function of that converts the scene while still being in alignment with its essence, right, so this is still playing a role very close to source, but converts the scene into expressions to have legibility to the rest of the world. Alright, so this is kind of what makes the scene cool or desirable or sexy or interesting.
This might be for example, wearing a leather jacket, the studded leather jacket. Oh with a safety pin through your nose I believe or your ear I can't remember, it was early punk, not necessarily part of the intrinsic palette of punk to dress punk. But it is the characteristic that gives rise to the expression of punk in a way that makes it legible to the rest of the world that helps you know what punk is. And by the way, it also makes punk attractive to at least those aspects of the rest of the world who are attracted to this. So because it is still source it is the thing is expressing itself, honestly and truly and with integrity outside. So artistry is about creating the language inside that becomes increasingly capable expressing the thing for itself. And charisma is creating the aesthetic for expressing it outside and by the way, also inside. 
So these are the three now, one of the things that often is the case is that when looking at the history of a scene, the source is really only known to those people who are keenly interested in the scene. Well, I knew her before the scene got cool. This is the kind of the Velvet Underground or the Pixies it's Adam, no DRock perhaps means that shooting or everybody knows who shorter is maybe only like physics quantum mechanic groupies know about DRock, but the idea is that the source is held in very high esteem, because the source is so close and so pure in the essence of what the scene is, but because they are not necessarily participating in artistry or charisma, they are not as legible in the broader environment. Okay, so then these three functions and again by the way, one person we play all three functions, and the functions may move, you may say that john lennon may have been playing the role of artists and charismatic and then sometimes maybe more source. And you know, Paul McCartney may been playing more of the role of charismatic, for example, they may be moving through time and space. But as these dysfunctions begin to be embodied and begin to be played out, the the scene becomes more real, it becomes more legible from the outside, it becomes more capable of people who are tuned to it to become more capable of sensing how they can act in the context of it. And as a consequence, more people begin to participate, which means that you have more More reality associated with the nature of the scene. And now at a certain critical threshold, new kinds of functions begin to emerge.
There, for example, the function of the journalist, the journalist, in plays the role of communicating the scene to the outside world. You also have the name of the librarian, or the archivist, who is doing the same thing internally, like the naming of the scene, who named the scene who gives the scene, its names gives the scene, its final signature symbols that stick and become identified with it. Remember, web two dot O, or social networking or the internet, right? The internet as a scene wasn't called the internet. Originally, there were dozens of names that were played with and somebody named it The internet and that stuck right to there's a, there's an enumeration there's a building out of a of an increasingly formal vocabulary. And then there's a, an identification, right? There's a notion of being able to identify who is in the scene. 
This is a Rolling Stone magazine beginning the process of helping the emergent rock and roll scene to get a sense of who is who, and what those relationships are and what is happening and where's water. There's a mapping and a making visible who. And there are now enthusiasts there are fans of the scene. These are people who are participating through charisma through artistry through source, but are not necessarily generative of the unfurling of the scene. It is for this horizons if you can imagine this scene is kind of like having a plane. And there's a circle that starts out very, very small and the circles expanding, and the interiority of that circle is the reasonably actualized scene. 
So in skating, for example, this is not just the skate punks who begin to adapt the charisma, I mean, the vintage dress like escape skaters, which didn't it at some point, at a certain point that didn't make make any sense that at a certain point, you started to get a sense of what the aesthetic of skating was, and they begin to then practice the moves and maybe they don't innovate anything. They're just playing with it and therefore the fans to the enthusiastic participants, but they're not posers. They're really skateparks. They really are connected to source and endeavoring to participate in the scene for its own purposes. And of course, are giving energy to it. They're buying skateboards, they're buying the clothes and accoutrements that are associated with skateboards and energy is then flowing into the scene, which of course then gives rise to the emergence of the next layer out, you've got your more parasitic artifacts, you've got your marketers, you've got your promoters you have your in fact posers. 
Posers are very important, posers are people who can simulate the scene, they can participate, usually through charisma but not necessarily because artistry requires a different kind of skillfulness. They look and talk and sound like central members of the scene, but they are participating in that energy principally from an orientation towards their ability to move the energy that should otherwise be going to the main into the scene to themselves, right, they are, in fact, quite significantly parasitic. Well, obviously, we see this happening to say for example, the blockchain scene, it got overrun by parasites pretty quickly because they didn't have very much of an immune system. marketers and promoters are less directly parasitic a marketer begins the process of kind of playing the role of charisma, the role of journalists even more thoroughly focused on the conversion of the essence of the scene into artifacts that are legible to the outside world. 
For the purposes of exchanging scene for energy, whatever that energy happens to be, and the promoters kind of doing the same thing in the opposite direction, creating attraction to pull people into the scene again, for the purposes of exchanging scene for energy, but also bringing people into the scene, which of course begins to dilute the scene because the scene becomes more and more about the effect and less and less about the source. Now, different scenes have different immune systems, different scenes have different characteristics of their ability to expand punk, for example, has a strong or had a strong immune system it was relatively not able to be marketed relatively not able to be promoted, but also therefore, as a partial consequence of that had a relatively limited potential limited sphere. capacity. 
By contrast, the personal computer scene, remember that that was a scene there was a point in time where there was a bunch of sort of weird folks hanging around in dimly lit rooms with card tables, futzing around with hardware and software on their own, who eventually gave rise to the articulation of the scene itself. And the scene group and, you know, kind of went through the same basic arc, you've got your Steve Jobs and Wozniak, you've got the building out of the, the librarian function and the journalist function. You've got, say the emergence of Wired magazine that began the process of promoting and extolling and expanding a number from from PC to internet, but you kind of get the story, the, the source, the essence of the scene in ways that were increasingly legible and increasingly attracted people in The scene and this particular scene because of its characteristics was simultaneously very heavily parasitized, but also had an extremely large sphere of capacity, right. In fact, it just became part of world. It didn't, it wasn't killed or it wasn't completely decimated by the amount of parasitism that settled on top of it. 
In blockchain, it remains to be seen the swarming of the parasites was super fast and really hard. And so it may be that the energy in my energy here, I mean, both a human creativity and money and other things. The energy that was necessary to maintain that scene and allow it to develop on its own terms from its source, may have been prematurely and massively redirected to these parasites, and the poor thing just sort of died in the cradle. It may be that the parasites did not kill it and it still has enough vitality to grow. And perhaps it can even build an immune system to be able to separate out the posers and to down regulate the marketers. To the point where they're only focused on their their marketing function is still in alignment with the essence of the scene and maintaining its homeostatic integrity.
I think that's that.