Alright, Episode Three.
I think today I'll just go with a an oldie but a goodie, one that I've been before, but I think it's useful to have this in its own specific frame. So today, what I'll do is I'll run through the kineton framework from being Snowden that identifies the distinction between three qualitatively different kinds of system and how we might go out responding to different kinds of systems. 
Okay, so to begin, the first kind of system is complicated.
A complicated system is defined by the fact that the phase space which is a concept that refers to the total possible states that the system might occupy total possibilities that might be occur within the system. The total face base of a complicated system is finite and bounded, which means that whether it's small like say, the relatively simple space of a tic tac toe game, which only has a handful of number of different kinds of ways the game can be played or very large, like say, the face piece of a boy and 777. It is, broadly speaking, unchanging. And for related reasons. causation, the relationship between cause and effect in complicated systems is largely clear and therefore predictable. So, what happens when you're in a complicated system, say, for example, you're dealing with tic tac toe is that the appropriate approach is to, to see how much of that face to face how much of the Central States the system you can in fact grasp with precision. If it's a simple system, like tic tac toe, then you can grasp all of it. In which case, the appropriate response is to simply identify with clarity exactly what the outcomes will be of each move, and then execute what would be a perfect approach. If the complicated system is too large for that kind of approach, say for example, again, our point 777, where it's sort of impossible for anyone to endeavor to grasp its totality. Nonetheless, one can become an expert in develop a lot of skill in predicting how we respond to different inputs and outputs. Because remember, at the end of the day, it's finite and bounded.
And with a properly constructed crew of experts, we can go about managing that system very effectively and efficiently. Whether we're talking about building one or maintaining one War is fun. And that's more or less what our civilization is very good at doing. It's very good at partitioning, identifying complicated systems, and then beginning the construction of levels of sophistication inclusive experts in the management. This brings us to a complex systems. So where a complicated system is defined by the fact that its face space is finite and bounded, and that the relationship between cause and effect is clear and predictable. A complex space is kind of the opposite, which is to say that its face space is about the states that it can occupy or themselves, changing. The kinds of states that it can occupy are changing. So it's a face space is unbounded. And as a consequence, internet and for the reasons the relationship between cause and effect in a complex system is unclear. Here, it is difficult and sometimes in fact, close to impossible to predict the way that the system will respond to a given input. This does not mean however, the complex system can't be dealt with effectively, it just requires a different approach.
And so, the appropriate approach to a complex system is to learn how to be responsive to its disposition. While you cannot predict and while cause and effect are unclear and complex systems, you do have correlations that has probabilities that can be identified with some level of confidence. It has a disposition and while this disposition is going to drift, if you become skillful at having sensitivity to the subtle signals of the system, and become skillful in exploring the state and the state base and the drift of the complex system, then you can respond to it effectively or more precisely adaptively. And this is the right way to respond to a complex system. 
And for me, the canonical example here is surfing. When you're surfing, you're dealing with a highly complex system, the wind, the state of the water, the temperature, the water, the direction, the waves, the intensity, the waves, the feedback between all these different things on each other, the kind of board that you have, the weight of the board, your weight, the way that you're paddling, your distribution of weight on the board, and these are so many different feedback loops that the relationship between cause and effect is very unclear. And things are changing constantly. There's no two times there's no way to serve the same wave twice. Nonetheless, with a appropriate amount of experienced and private As you can build the capacity to become a very skillful surfer, and achieve something that we properly termed beautiful. And then this brings us to chaos. If in complication, the relationship between cause and effect is clear and predictable and in complexity we have, it is unclear, and yet we have dispositions. When we finally get to chaos, we find ourselves in a circumstance where even dispositions go away that, in effect in a chaotic system, we have no basis for making good choices. 
So, it's actually easier to just jump to the example here, we can imagine that we're on one of those enormous waves that Laird Hamilton made famous and without knowing or willy nilly, we find ourselves swept under by the wave deep underwater. Twisted Every tale bubbles everywhere and it's effectively pitch black. So this is chaos, we have no idea which way is up. And if we were to endeavor to swim to what we may think is up, we're just as likely to be swimming down or towards the rocks as we are towards the surface. And even if we made it to the surface we find might find ourselves still in the middle of the whitewater and phone. Chaos, we can't actually yet make a good choice. And so the way that one response to chaos is to wait to slow down to conserve your capacity to respond. If and when the system transitions back into complexity. go limp. conserve your energy and weight. And when you then notice that perhaps light is up and the bubbles are all kind of going in. same direction towards the light.
You've transitioned back into a complex space and you can begin to redeploy your skillfulness in this case to swim to the surface. And that's pretty much it. So we have complicated, complex, chaotic, we have finite bounded, clear causation, predictable results, appropriately met by expertise, inclusive experts that can manage complicated. We have just positions, we have subtle signals. We have experimentation and exploration in the construction of an adaptive capacity in complexity.
And then we have waiting, being in a liminal space listening, becoming very subtle and listening and allowing a chaotic space to transform back into a complex space. That's all.