So, as I've been contemplating these videos, and I've been thinking about the, the right bite size, I've noticed that in order to convey the bigger picture, there's a whole lot of smaller bites. So at this point, I'm going to try to proceed by grabbing the largest bites that I think I can convey in seven minutes. And then trying to put them in an order where bigger pieces can actually start to come together. So what I'd actually request is that in the process, if you happen to be looking at these at all, looking at them, that you contemplate each piece is being endeavoring to stand alone, but it definitely doesn't make sense fully outside of a much broader context and there is in fact, a much broader context. So Today, I want to talk about a model that I call the arc Heidi Smith model. And I don't think it's very well known. It's not, as far as I know, published in any fashion. And it's more of a heuristic, but it's useful. And so, so here we go. The premise is that we can identify three consistent phases in how human beings as individuals and groups operate together. Strategically, I suppose that's not really the best term, but you'll get it almost it's almost like a typology. So the first type is what I'm going to call the wild type. And importantly, the key context of the wild type is that the wild type is optimized for adapted for the niche of just nature. So human beings were the primary problems are associated with survival in nature, are the wild types. 
This is our received evolved toolkit and is what we became over two and a half million years and what we very much were for 250,000 years. And we got good enough at it that we developed a toolkit that I will call consciousness that enabled us to move into any new niche. We could be. In the African savannah, we can be up the Arctic, we could be Polynesians out of the ocean. And in a timeframe that is much, much faster than biological evolution could develop an adaptive capacity. Denali MIT is able to survive in that niche, but very quickly, actually managed to peak predator in that niche. And so the wild type human has this capacity to use a way of working together as a group to achieve a capability of very, very rapidly building a toolkit that enables them to Enter into and become the peak predator in any natural niche. And when I'm talking about consciousness, I have to be a little careful because that's a really wide ranging word that means a lot of things to a lot of people. So I actually want something specific and kind of simpler, maybe a little bit not intuitive. And that is the thing that happens when different people come together and are capable of engaging in a good faith conversation, the sort of the synergistic value of multiple different human perspectives, working together to generate something which is much, much larger than the sum of the parts. So that's actually what I mean by consciousness. and the value should give us a different term for it. 
But it is, in fact, the content of most of our minds, right. Most of what we have in our minds is the consequence of our interactions with other people that upgrade our sense of what's happening in the world, how the world works and how we should be responsive to it. So culture, for example, is produced by consciousness. Consciousness is generated in the context of culture. And so this complex of a wild type human in a arbitrarily large number of possible niches, using consciousness in the context of culture to produce a culture that has adapted to a niche is the first big piece. So, then something interesting happens when the niche shifts from being, nature to being, consciousness and culture itself. This happens when wild type groups enter into conflict, where they can't just migrate further to resolve a conflict. So, my wild type tribe and your wild type tribe have filled their local niche and they're beginning to bump up against each other as population increases or as we maybe hunt native Animals to extinction.
And there's no other place for us to go that if I move this with somebody else they've ever this would have somebody else there that humans have expanded to fill all available space, and have begun to actually fill the carrying capacity, that space. And now, we're actually in conflict with ourselves as our primary selection requirement. So stage two. Now what emerges in stage two, and I think this transition is probably the most important part of this model. I'm going to call the domesticated type domesticated type has the ability to coordinate much, much larger groups of people than are available in the wild type. And it does this by taking consciousness and culture and making a move that simplifies both of them. enormously while maintaining a substantial portion of its of their capacity to generate synergistic capabilities and also enabled them to scale. So, on the one hand, we move from consciousness to narrative. And on the other hand, we move from culture to society. And in both cases, the basic way of feeling is that is it the something that is very informal and very co produced. 
So, consciousness really has no content other than the contributions of all the people in part of the conversation, and nobody has any particular priority in the conversation. Narrative doesn't work that way. Narrative actually, in some sense lives out there as a formal narrative. It's a form of mythology. It's a dogma, it's an orthodoxy that you relate to is something that is in some sense, older, more foundation on more real than you, you have to learn it and understand how to operate within it. You don't really have any authority over it. And to the extent there is any authority, this actually exists embedded in the framework of society, which is a more or less formal, it is certainly real, it may in fact be articulated, it may not group of individuals who aren't everyone who have specific authority to relate to the narrative. So you mean for example, the priestly caste, who has the responsibility for interpreting and maybe then updating the official, mythological or religious narrative, or a kingly caste? Who has responsibility for updating and modifying the official legal narrative as it were. And this is essentially the toolkit of domestication and with this combination of narrative and society, domestication has the ability to grow very, very at scale in comparison to the world. 
So the wild type seems largely bounded by our natural, what are called Dunbar limits. So 150 people in a tribe, you can have some second cousins out to 1500 people, you have a small kernel and say 12 that are close, close knit group. And this is all largely biological, that our bodies are deeply, deeply processing Dunbar kind of signals that maintains a coherent group of about that size. But once a group gets bigger than that the wild type has a really hard time maintaining the integrity of the group domesticated has a whole set of mechanisms, largely narrative in the policing mechanisms of society that allows it to scale. And so you get large city states and the thing is that in a in a fight, domesticated outcompetes wild most of the time and over time as domesticated continues to progress. verte by virtue of the ways that one can in fact, get more and more capacity using history and story and scale domesticated effectively extinguishes Wild. And so you'll have some territory. And it'll be sort of an unlimited geographic expanding territory, it is now within the boundary of the kingdom. And now we enter into the third phase. So if wild type is distinguished by the fact that its missions nature, and domesticated is distinguished with a type of its niche is in fact consciousness and culture. This third type, which I will call the feral type, is distinguished by the type of its niche is narrative and society. So it operates within the boundaries of the kingdom. 
So as the kingdom clears out the wild type in a sort of overloading and controlling the wild humans that are within it, and keeping them domesticated and coordinated within a social narrative framework, you then begin to see the emergence of a niche for defection. A niche that begins to lose connection with nature because it's now fully intermediated by narrative by society begins to perceive society itself as being in many ways reality narrative itself as being reality. And this gives rise to effectively two major failure conditions that seem to always show up in domesticated type, no domesticated types, so far as figured out how to be durably resilient to this set of conditions. One is delusion, which is a an identification with a framework and identification with a narrative with an ideology that takes the framework takes the ideology takes the story, as actually being reality as more real than reality. So a confusion and inability to actually perceive reality directly and to connect with reality directly and an increasing connection to an addiction to and dependence on the toolkit of the stories that you've been taught that you've mastered, learn in the context of domestication and then the other is defection which is the perception of society as being first and foremost, authority as being first and foremost, a subtle or not so subtle conflict between domesticated people. 
So you could actually see it as the vertical hierarchy with a sense of people who are on the lower levels of the hierarchy. The people above them are extracting value, they're taking advantage they are opressing, or being tyrants or even in a peer to peer hierarchy, a growing sense, that is kind of every man for himself. Or another sense of, you know, if you're looking around the table and you don't know who the sucker is the sucker is you. And this actually emerges in circumstances where I'm going to use a kind of a poetic language where justice is no longer happening. And I think justice can really be neatly described here. When, when good acts are not rewarded, and bad acts are not punished. Justice is absences. 
You can think of this as almost like a loop, that there's a an action, that individual or group engages in an action, that action either shows up as being broadly beneficial, globally beneficial to the larger community, or it ends up being locally beneficial to the individual, the group and to the detriment of the larger community. Right. So it's either I'm acting in a way that is in my interest and our interests or I'm acting and whether it's in our my interests, and antithetical to our interests. And to degree to which the things that are both local and global, don't get rewarded, and things that are local, but anti global, don't get punished right now in the absence of justice. And it seems to be the case that so far for a lot of reasons that we'll have to talk under the videos. Any domestic environment always ends up with gaps in justice. And when you have a gap in justice, what happens is you developing a niche where Some smaller group, let's say, a cluster of gangsters, again, which might be a cabal, or it might be, you know, a group of bureaucrats who just recognize that they can get away with stuff and not be punished. And so and by the way, if they try to do good things, increasingly, that doesn't actually show up as any benefit to them. So in both cases, the feedback of doing good benefits me and everyone and the feedback of doing bad punishes me, goes away. And so the society begins to transition into a space where if you don't know who the sucker is, you are the sucker. And now we're beginning to move into federalization. It's almost like an infection. And it goes through a bunch of different stages that I'm not going to articulate right now. But what it does is it eats away at the essence of what holds domestication together. 
And so, and domestication has very little capacity to boatman ultimately the end of the day, police itself it tries it literally creates In their attempts to prevent these things from happening, but even within the police corruption starts to seep in. And the relationship between the police and the people in the ministry with the police and other authorities and the relationship between police and the gangs, we just are getting these almost fractal defection patterns where the fabric of domestication itself becomes the Nisha becomes the source. And fidelity eventually corrupts domestication from within. And inevitably, at some point, it begins to collapse. And this then generates a cycle where the wild type in nature is able to thrive and survive under complex and chaotic circumstances. The domesticated type, moves complexity into complication builds an enormous control structure to maintain complication. But by so doing, as that control structure itself begins to be broken down by a lot of different forces, but This narrative specifically, for reality, it gets transitioned from complications straight through into chaos, which you cannot survive. 
It goes away, we call that collapse, and then the wild type to the degree to which it survives emergency, just think about this, maybe just in the narrative of the fall of Rome, domesticated Rome, begins to extend into a massive control structure, an entire Empire. inside of that virality begins to evolve and emerge and eventually eats the integrity of the system, the system begins to collapse, the collapse begins to accelerate. And then whoever is able to revert back to something like the wild type Rico hears in different places, and you begin the cycle again, in this tape case, in the form of Western civilization. So that's that that's that's the story. And for those who want to continue watching, I'll just do a very brief use of the Game of Thrones as an example, to go ahead. We have a nice little poetic story that isn't like I think telling the story so before the show begins, we have had a horrible collapse winter came. creatures from the north came down, they wreak havoc were in a wild chaotic state. Something came together that brought the people back into a space of able to operate the form separate kingdoms, largely familial. They coordinated winter receded, they built a giant wall.
And then domestication said, and you had this interesting gradient, where the north on the border with the domesticated wild is what historic is called the March, like what Mr. Key is in charge of is the border between the domesticated and the wild. And because the border is always pushed on by nature, it can't ever quite become fully domesticated, and it tends to be the most resilient to fair rally. So it's sort of holds the border. You go all the way away from the border, you end up in King's Landing As far away from the walls as you can get, and in the center of Empire in the center of domestication, and in some sense precisely because it doesn't receive any pushback from nature, it is now the pure place where the niche is, in fact, society, the niche is how to take advantage of narrative, and is the place where fidelity emerges, and where fidelity becomes the dominant strategy. 
So you see this tension between the Starks who are still maintaining the integrity of high domestication in the context of holding the wall against wild nature and the threats of beyond the pale, and you have the Lannisters who are optimized for pure morality and mastered the subtle art of understanding how to destabilize the domesticated using the tools of defection. And by the way, even if delusion and as we see the Game of Thrones, the morality begins to spread. The high domesticated eventually become overcome duped to see destroyed by the feral things begin to fall apart. war of all against all begins to emerge. The feral don't have the capacity to Rico here into domesticated because their fundamental strategy is antithetical to society and narrative itself. And winter comes, nature re establishes itself, chaos begins to emerge. And then whoever is able to hold together at all rapidly has to redevelop a concentrated new wild type toolkit, deeply innovative and adaptive to the novel environment. And if they're lucky, they begin to grow up, create the ground for the cycle to begin, and that's what I think happens to the rest of the show. And that's all.