So continuing the process with this episode, I will be trying to take a an extension on the medium post called understanding the blue church. So this is an effort to see if the visual medium can help extend or enhance that particular medium post. I don't actually know whether or not it would be more beneficial for someone to have read that first to watch this and read it, or to really watch this or possibly to engage their neither.
So here's the the proposition. When I when I use the phrase with the concepts of blue church, there's a handful of distinctions that I feel are important to make first that I noticed. The lack of them, I think, seemed to leave some people confused. So first and foremost. I am not in any normal sense talking about anything like a church or we're not we're not talking About the catholic church or the Episcopalian church or big buildings with crosses on top and whatnot. It is a metaphor. And I think it's a useful metaphor because there are churchy things involved with this, this object, the blue church. 
Second, while while it is the case that you can identify certain actual things like say, Harvard, or the New York Times, that are part of something that could be called the blue church. I think it's actually much more interesting, important and useful to perceive this thing.
This thing I'm calling the blue church, from the perspective of an abstraction from the perspective of a fundamental way of going about doing certain kinds of things in social space that was developed in a certain timeframe that I'll talk about in a moment under certain conditions and that happens to have been embodied in certain institutions that we can physically touch or let's talk about. But they're not actually the key. So for example, I would say that there is some variant on the blue church in most of the Western civilizations. And they are different institutional structures. And then they behave differently because they have different paths dependency and how they got here. So the second distinction is to try to separate the things that we are familiar with, from what I think is the more fundamental characteristics of how this particular process came to be and how it operates. 
And then the third is to make a distinction between the form the blue church and the content, what I call the blue faith.
Now, again, it is the case that there is a linkage which is why it's useful to even talk about the book that's being pulled between The blue face and the blue church and the color blue, because both are broadly right now in the United States associated with the left and with the Democratic Party.
But all of those cannon and should be also decomposed and separated. So I still hitting the blue faith from the blue church, I think is useful and helpful. And I haven't actually spent an enormous amount of time digging into the specific characteristics of the blue faith and how it came to be. I could sort of broad brush say that it seems to be showing up as the consequence of the long development of a number of different things that were more or less kind of categorized as the new left back for six decades ago, and how they come to show up now, but, you know, there's a broad brush. I'm not talking about that. I'm talking about the form the the the blue church itself, okay. 
So given that, let me go deeper. I mean, the big picture concept is to say that in society, which is to say in human structures that are much larger than the kinds of Aboriginal social arrangements that we developed in millions of years ago, hundreds of thousands of years ago, in the kinds of things that emerged at scale after the development of agricultural civilization, so societies in societies we need some way to go about getting this massive people to coordinate to be on the same page to be able to make choices together and undertake actions in a coordinated fashion. And that this way, I'm going to call this a social control structure and I don't mean anything particularly malevolent about that. I don't mean controlling the sense necessarily of tyranny, although it certainly can be tyrannical, but more than that, frenetic sense or even in the steam engine sense and just a necessary mechanism to get a bunch of disparate kinds of elements to work together well.
And the social control structures evolve or develop under certain kinds of social conditions. So for example, the Victorian era social control structure grew up in the middle of the 19th century under the context of the significant increase in population that had been delivered by the that particular agricultural revolution. But the new urbanization, by the emergence of industrial technology, and by the changes in human civilization that were brought about by the railroad, and by the early emergence of the telegraph was changed the way that we communicate and of course, even the newspaper which also changed the way we can communicate. So, these are all characteristics of the social environment that gave rise to certain possibilities and certain necessities that any social control structure would have to deal with. And over time as certain experiments or tried different approaches were endeavored a particular collection that I would call the Victorian era structure came into being and it worked for a while.
And then, in the early part of the 20th century, the situation had changed and that particular control structure broke down. And we saw in the middle of the 20th century, the emergence of a new social control structure, and that is what I'm calling the blue church.
So, here we saw, again, significant change across the entire social field, again, a massive increase in population. A significant shift in the way that people lived the suburban diaspora, for example. massive changes in transportation, the ability to travel by aircraft or car really changed the cosmopolitanism of individual human beings. And the massification of both production processes. And I think most importantly, communications. So the emergence of mass media, most notably television.
And so we might say that the blue church is the consequence of what happens when you endeavor to generate a social control structure in that context, in specifically might say that the blue church is how one goes about doing social control in the context of broadcast. So not making a bit of a shift, and I'm focusing on what I think is the main point. The blue church is quite characteristic we broadcast and you might even say the broadcast will tend to show up as something like the blue church. So what does that mean? So first broadcast is a mode of communication, where you have a strong a symmetry Between the signaler, the communicator, the expressor. And the audience meaning both that there may be a small number of signalers. Like say one, and potentially very large number of, of audience, maybe everyone.
Think radio or TV where one TV show like say, the Super Bowl might have hundreds of millions of viewers, and only a very small number of people who are actually in charge of what's being broadcast.
It also has a singular direction, which is that the signal goes from the signaler to the receiver. And there's very, very little going back. This was largely one way so that the mental image of broadcast television works and it's important. But it's not exclusive. You know, if you take a look at, for example, the way that that the education system, at least the United States shows up in that same time frame. It is also broadcast by you have a professor who sits at the front there's only one or maybe two. There's some large number of students and the professors in charge of speaking, the students are responsible for listening. And there's very little background. And so still a broadcast type ology. And the proposition that I'm making is that this this nature of broadcast I apology, one is characteristic up and down across the blue church and therefore becomes one of the primary characteristics to look at and to has implications. It has implications in terms of what kinds of things are said how power shows up and plays with the constraints of how broadcast operates. And also in terms of what the underlying consciousness and psychological characteristics of human beings are the happen to develop in this environment. So we'll get to that actually a little bit a little bit. And remember, this is not a an effort to disparage either broadcast or the blue church is a diagnosis to describe something that seems to have simply been the case of phenomenon. And in fact, it worked. Well, right would we take a look at the at the scope of what civilization was able to accomplish in the 20th century, it was broadly astoundingly awesome. The growth, the well being of human beings wind up enormously across the board, in almost every location of the all kinds of travesties as well, for sure. But that's just part of what happened. But the things like being able to go to the moon, or build health care systems that radically improved the quality of life where the agricultural revolution of that century, were all part and parcel of the kinds of things the blizzard could do. And it did this by generating a certain topology. So now we're into the second major point. The topology the booth church, seems to be defined by two major characteristics. One characteristic is its organization into a hierarchy, as all broadcasts are want to be the There's just a two layer hierarchy, the broadcaster and the signal. But in this case, it's a multi layer hierarchy. And it's a hierarchy that in the vertical direction, you could say, is a hierarchy of expertise or of legitimate and or credible authority. So when it works well, the way the blue church operates is that in endeavors to put into place various meritocratic filtering mechanisms to identify individuals and groups of individuals who have the capacity for or have achieved a particular domain expertise, puts them in charge of figuring stuff out to making sense of the world.
And then of expressing that sense in the broadcast channels, right? So you would like to have the people who know what's going on being the ones who evaluate what's happening and then sharing that with everybody else. And that's more of this the design, or at least that's the design intent and me kind of works well in certain circumstances and under certain constraints.
Of course, it has a number of relatively obvious failure conditions that will always show up in any kind of asymmetric hierarchy. So it's obvious that if you want to control something, what you do is you find out the control system. And if that control system happens to have a directionality to the way that information flows, and it tends to have a hierarchy, then what you do is find a way to get to the top of the hierarchy effectively created a really high quality niche. And as any evolutionary theorists will tell you, every niche is going to be filled. And of course, that sort of thing has happened and will continue to happen in anything that looks like that. Now, if you go in the downward direction, you have a different set of characteristics of expertise and legitimate authority on what happened on the way up on the way down what you have is the ability to be good at receiving and acting on quote unquote, good opinion.
So the idea here is think about the student. The the professor expresses what is has to be the case, the lesson, the students job is to listen, to understand to map the meaningful components of the lesson. And then to be able to respond effectively to queries. The content is in the lesson. So if you think is like a math class, if the teacher says two plus two equals four, the students job is to hear what is to post to respond with for. So this is good opinion. And we can say, by the way, that this is characteristic of the totality of content. This is part of the reason why the blue church is an effective control structure. It's very, if you imagine to every single human being had their own bespoke interpretation of how to drive and what various kinds of signals like red lights meant. You'd have catastrophe. It's actually quite useful and necessary for us all to be on the same page about how to respond to certain signals so that we can coordinate social behavior. And again, that's the idea. So within a certain boundary conditions. The idea is the blue church enables us to have people who spend time in effort and build capability processing, we are proceeding a reality like say, what's the temperature of the the melting point of metal, and then broadcasting that down to whoever needs to receive it information, who then receives it and conveys it accurately. And what's interesting is the good opinion works both in relationship to up and side to side, so that we can police and signal each other. Simply, we should just do that if I express something within the boundary conditions of good opinion, then at a minimum, you can know that I'm part of your structure, you can you can know that I'm in your group. And in fact, depending on the flavor of good opinion that I express, you can even position me and know where I am in that group. And you can orient yourself and how to relate to me, by the way, and even how to relate to me is oftentimes the content of broadcast. And so if you watch for example, a lot of the primary signaling organisms of the blue church like to the New York Times, most of what they are doing Is orienting the audience on how to orient themselves towards other phenomenon in the world, right? They're not actually conveying content, most of the time. Most of what they're doing is providing kind of a prefab set of evaluations of here's what the landscape looks like. And here's how you watch respond to it. So that you are acting within the constraints of, of good opinion. Or in the most positive spin, you're acting under the recommendation of wise people who've done a good job digesting this and providing the prefab way of responding to the world. And obviously, you want can take a less generous opinion of what they're up to. 
Okay, so that's the second major point. 
So now we're just kind of into the last part, which is a very good way of understanding what's happening now is that the conditions are once again changing. And I should note that there's a seem to be an acceleration, the duration of the Victorian control structure was longer. twice as long as the duration of the blue church control structure. And while it's sort of very messy to endeavor to project that on to a specific curve, it nonetheless does seem to be the case that one of the consequences of the acceleration of innovation is a reduction in the duration of these kinds of control structures. So, that implies two things. One is that the if the if you say that the conditions upon which the blue church were was created, and for which it was adapted, or themselves changing, then this is a lot like the changing of a niche. You know, if you if you see the, you know, the end of the Ice Age means the end of the woolly mammoth, no matter how awesome the woolly mammoth was in, in the snow, the the end of the broadcast age and the emergence of a new way of, at the very least, making sense of the world and coordinating our thoughts and actions, portions ends the end of the blue church no matter how awesome or not awesome, you think it was. 
So that's one and and then we can also begin to do some work on understanding what might be in the process of emergent, okay? What what are the characteristics of the contemporary environment where the things that might emerge on top of a symmetric, an interactive medium. That's how we can actually be thoughtful about what the future might look like. And then we had this other piece, which is that, hey, maybe in a process of accelerating change, might be in a circumstance where whatever is in the process of emerging might actually be due to a rather brief appearance. You know, if the blue church lasted from say, I don't know the 1940s 1950s, up until 2016 2010, in that range, really talking about a 5060 year timeframe. So if the next thing that comes along last half as long we're talking about something that The historical record is basically just a blip.
So it's kind of interesting. I don't know if that's the case, but it's intriguing.
I noticed this is running pretty long. So I'll just drop a little acota. And this is something that was also put into the tail end of the video, sorry, into the into the medium post. And that has to do with what might in fact, be a fundamentally problematic aspect of this entire approach to social coordination. So I mentioned that there was a moment before these kinds of social control systems, the human Aboriginal tribe, or band level says of coordination, that was, what we did and how we operated for millions of years. And now, we've been operating under a different mode, social control that has been figuring out how to do things and competing with itself since you know, 15,000 years ago or so. Now, there's actually A pretty interesting things that we can say about the maximum bandwidth, the maximum out of information processing, that a information processing architecture of the sort, that any kind of social control system must look like, for example, anything that is hierarchical at all has actually a limit on the amount of information that it can process. And what's interesting about that is that we may have passed that limit, that the world that we currently live in the world that exists as a consequence of the success of the blue church may actually be more complex than any hierarchical social control system can manage at all. So it's not just a matter that things have changed, and therefore we're in store for some meaningfully significant shift from the blue church model to some other kind of broadly comparable model.
Rather that something even more fundamental has changed. And that therefore, we actually are now in the process of shifting, if we make this shift at all, to something that is as different from civilization, as civilization was from pre civilized travels tribalism or the band's level of coordination. Again, we can talk about some characteristics this thing whatever it is, if it is to survive at all, must be able to cope with accelerating change exponential technology, for example, it must be able to cope with the ambient complexity of the total natural environment. And it must be able to cope with the ambient and recursive complexity of human beings ourselves, the fact that anthro complexity is different than just natural complexity. And that's it, so 20 minutes I hope this is interesting.