Okay, let's try a particularly difficult one today.
I feel like trying to make a bigger move, which is to say to do something, which requires already having a couple of the other concepts in place. So today I will be importing concepts of the complicated the complex. That's Episode Two and, to a lesser extent, some of the other concepts that you could find in my immediate post. I'll try to keep that relatively light. But if you haven't really read and understood the concepts, the complicated complex in the connection model, you might want to do that first. So we'll be talking about today is something that I refer to as the tainter plus model. This is a an extension or an effort to be an extension of the model that was put forward by Joseph teacher, I should point out that I have no idea what I'm doing here. And so this is not something that he has any particular endorsement of so by ordinary deep code rules, if any of this sounds good or interesting, then you should assume that it's entirely his and it sounds bad foolish assume that it's entirely minor are ours.
So with that caveat, this idea requires a little bit of exposition. So it might take longer than usual, I hope you bear with me, but I do actually think it's one of the more interesting and incisive concepts that's out there. It begins with the observation of the fact that the way we humans so far in civilization typically get what we need from the complex, natural world which is to say the way that we access and make use of resources of complex nature is that we are innovate, construct and manage complicated structures to do it. And we might say that the the tainter plus model is an observation of how this dynamic seems to continually play out. I'm going to use a particular metaphor throughout the conversation, which is the oil system, the oil industry, the oil, economy, etc, etc as an example of a complicated system and oil in this case being a complex natural resource. So, it begins with the discovery of a possibility, but opportunity, you already have some kind of social environment that is more or less getting its needs met and you come across some capability of accessing some useful resource that can add value to your social environment. So it is discovered that oil can be use, say, for example, for energy. Going to simplify the example there, I know that petroleum has lots and lots of different uses that I don't know the exact history perfectly. So let's just imagine that its origin story starts with energy. 
And the beginning, you don't really need it, you already got the energy sources that you need, your society is not built around access needs, wealth just discovered do that. So it's all upside. And in fact, it's generally almost by definition, relatively easy to get because otherwise, you didn't spend any time looking for something that's currently deeply, deeply valuable. So that you can go out with a shovel to some fields in dig up some sand and through some broken simple process, have yourself a barrel of oil, and then you can use it for lighting lamps or lubricating axles or whatnot. And the energy return is quite substantial compared to the energy investment the same if you get Hundred barrels of oil of useful value for the equivalent of one barrel of oil of energy expended because there's just a lot of low hanging fruit. 
This space of resources not been yet meaningfully explored. And for some reason you've entered into the possibility of getting there. And so yet, what happens here is that because the the resource shows up is that not being useful, and in fact, because of the ratio between energy expenditure net return, it shows up as being attractive. More people begin to spend more time getting it using it. And as a consequence, it begins to add value to the social infrastructure, the possibilities become actualities and becomes useful and interesting to build more things on this foundation. You might for example, begin to innovate things that require the use of oil innovate the internal combustion engine. And this gives rise to airplanes and to shifting pharmaceutical while or to automotive industry, I'm in a fashion that simply wouldn't existed before. And so on the one hand, you see as an expansion of social capability on the on the basis of this new phase in this new reservoir of potential.
On the other hand, which you begin to see also is that the low hanging fruit get picked relatively quickly. And we find it becomes a little bit harder to access the underlying resource to now instead of being able to just kind of dig up the shuttle, you have to actually build some kind of structure. And maybe because it's being used more broadly, you also have to build ways of distributing it more broadly. And perhaps, if the use cases are in fact more diverse, get to extra certain certain processing mechanisms to pull out the distillate. into convert into plastics and whatnot. And so what ends up happening is, in order to take advantage of the increasing possibilities, in order to maintain an increasing demand, you have to increase your intensity of extraction, what is becoming a more challenging to extract process and distribute resource, which means you have to build a more complicated structure to do all this work.
That's the major move. And there are a couple of consequences to this. One, which I think it's important to note upfront is that as far as I can tell, any interaction of the complicated the complex will result in some externality to the complex some waste product or some disruption to the homeostatic feedback loops that maintain the integrity of the complex system.
So in this case, for example, at a minimum, you're going to be destroying the physical environment where you're extracting oil. And at least in the narrowband era, like the ground is no longer what used to be. And of course, you see broader consequences. The outside, the use of the resources are putting carbon into the atmosphere. Throughout the distribution channel, we have opportunities for your oil tanker spilling, etc. And as you mentioned, by the way, you also have different outputs in different layers of the four layer model. You might for example, find yourself in the odd circumstances, you're having to maintain a military structure to hold politically aligned regimes in locations that have access to this resource, which means you're actually creating extra noise into your social complex environment and not just physical complex. So what is this, this output of externalities from complicated into complex in a fashion that begins to break down the domestic capacity of the complex environment. The second observation is that the complicated institutions that you're putting together, have an increasing carrying cost where there, there's something a real thing and they have a lot of maintenance involved. Imagine that you have to be able to build an entire manufacturing industry to create the underlying equipment to create the underlying structures to to extract the oil, you have to build a transportation industry to be able to move it from point on beat, you have to train people to be able to operate this stuff mean at a certain point of time, you're going to get a whole lot of carrying cost.
So then we get to the next move, would be the ratio of energy, return for energy expended goes through a curve. In the beginning, you'll see a situation where the ability to get better at doing it pays dividends. And so as you're becoming more complicated, you're actually also becoming more efficient. So maybe ratio goes from one to 10 barrels of energy return from one barrel energy expended to 100 to one, because you've just kind of picked the low hanging fruit in what you might call innovation space, not not the low hanging fruit and just finding the oil, but the low hanging fruit and getting better at finding the oil. And this is the classic acceleration part of an innovation Esker. And so this has been the consequence of making you want to double down you're actually getting better and better and better. So keep doing it. Stand up and to build out. But at a certain point, there's going to be a tipping point where the low hanging fruit in innovation space themselves start to get harder to get. 
And so you're now spending more and more to get the same amount or even declining amount of innovation, which is still showing up as it as an acceleration in the underlying return on physical oil. So it'd be used to spend $1 to get $10 of oil. Now you're spending $1 to get this is very complicated. You're spending a barrel of oil to get innovation, that say increases your rate of return on an energy investment in oil by 10%. And then in the next year, it only increases your rate of return well, by 8%, you DESE your acceleration is decelerate with the velocity is still increasing. But now what's happening is you're getting into the middle of that S curve, which means that the top is coming. But at the same time, you're now stuck in this situation where your social infrastructure is now deeply committed to this underlying resource and into the proliferated. Almost like the roots became increasingly complicated as they expand up the proliferating use cases and the entire social environment. 
So now, you have not just a useful resource for transportation you have an entire transportation sector, trucking trains and automotive that has people using oil for tires and for lubrication and in a giant fracture the entire employment base is built on top of the foundation of this resource and its production its process and its distribution its use. So it does it happens you find yourself in a situation where, on the one hand, is a gigantic complicated infrastructures is not proliferated throughout the entire social field, got political influence you've got academic and scientific is becoming too big to fail. Yet on the other hand, precisely because becoming increasingly complicated is carrying cost is becoming higher and higher and more and more fragile. It's actually becoming all fragile brittle as it as a whole system. So we have now a some kind of relationship between the growth of the underlying extracted and use capability and externalities from the complicated in the complex. You have a, an increasing difficulty in actually accessing first innovation and then second, the actual underlying resource so your energy investment to energy return ratios beginning to slow down.
You've got an increasing requirement or dependence of the overall social environment on this complicated institution. And you have an increasing complicatedness carrying cost and fragility, and by the way, difficulty in modifying the centralized institution. So they've got last Important to difficulty modify means things like, it's actually really not at all simple to migrate a fast oil infrastructure to some other kind of infrastructure. It seems like it might be trivial to move from seed oil to solar electric. Even if you're doing it very deliberately, it's not. And obviously, there's lots of things that can't, you actually need still need oil to do start the solar can't do.
Okay, and by the way, if all of this and this is kind of the point is so massively complicated to do way outside of the conscious awareness of the collective intelligence that is driving and making decisions in the environment, this is all stuff that's being done. Kind of in the unconscious intelligence that happens in just markets. It's outside of the scope of any truly comprehensive systems consciousness, it's happening almost instinctively at this point. So when you get to the level, at some point somewhere, something breaks, either the energy invested energy return starts to vector towards flat, you're putting a barrel of oil in and you're only getting a barrel of oil out. In fact, maybe you start getting less than a barrel of oil out. And you're actually burning other resources to maintain this thing. And by the way, think about this in the context of the four layer model, it might be that you're burning cultural or social resources or geopolitical resources. Or you're falsifying financial records, to maintain the integrity of something over here that's happening in the energy space, but these things can actually be transformed back and forth. It's really easy to lose track of what's going on. When you make those transformations. If you're subsidizing energy, through military, it may be difficult to connect the dots. In any event, the net net at energy expended begins to actually be more than energy return. Now you're, you're screwed, at some point is going to come to an end.
Or maybe the complex system begins to break down, you've been powering massive kinds of externalities from the complicated, very complex environment, something might break. And again, there's something might be something simple, like you just couldn't reach the edge of the ability to reach the resource or innovation capacity just can't jump some gap and you're no longer able to get you hunted your prey animal to extinction and deserve no more prey animals. Oregon, maybe if it finds its way into some other domain, it's not obvious to make the connection. So climate change is sort of an obvious example here. But again, economics and politics are equal equivalent, or the complicated system itself begins to have so much kind of becomes rokoko becomes nearly impossible to stay ahead of the race, that you're running faster and faster and faster. Just to stay even, and your ability to spin plates just just keep keep, keep keep pace, things are beginning to become so fragile that cascades and breakdowns bring the whole thing down. And you know that that's that you find yourself in a situation where you cannot continue going down this path. 
And yet, you've now become really rather deeply addicted to this path. And so any negative any slimmed down, even not even going back or just decreasing velocity starts to show up as some kind of crisis the last move to the teacher curve. So your innovation curve is now done this with the teacher curve is now about to do this, and you end up with some kind of involuntary collapse. In the connection models Snowden, you are now moving from the complicated environment into some kind of Through chaos, and unfortunately, the further down the chain to curse God, the more Roco your complicated institutions, the more deeply connected this particular structure is to the rest of the social system, the more likely that you waited too long, and therefore the more likely that your dive through chaos is going to be rather deep. Okay, and that's that's that. Some things to keep in mind. Obviously, I've mentioned innovation. And this this model actually includes with innovation itself shows up in the path of innovation has its own decreasing returns in particular domains. What's interesting about this is that it actually is domain specific that once you've created a bounded complicated domain, the complicated is by definition, finite and bounded. While you may have a large amount of territory to explore, nonetheless, that territory is fine. And this is one of the primary reasons why you get decreasing returns to innovation. You're not innovating in the total space of possible invention, you're innovating the specific getting better at deploying this resource, in this case, oil, which means you're going to have some innovation Esker. And all of your novel innovations, anything new that you might explore, are actually going to show up as, like, choices that you can't make, they're going to show the solar in 1973.
They're going to show up as you know, maybe stopping engaging in energy consumption at this level for other reasons for the can see things there in the city of the possibility space of invention, but not in the possibility space using invention for the purposes of experiments to me. So that's, that's crucial. And all of this is not taking place in the context of this relationship between the complicated in the complex. And while it does very much seem to be the case that this hundred plus model describes something fundamental, which is that if you're playing the game of taking a complicated to act on and extract what you need from the complex, you're in a tantric process. And by the way, you're also in the Snowden process. This does not necessarily mean that we humans are forever committed to writing the cycle of discovering new possibility, become addicted to it and then collapse.
What it means is that we may need to figure out how to do things that are more fluidly, fundamentally connected to the complex, which is to say, operating the complex, do things in the complicated but never find ourselves addicted to and committed to the complicated. That is part of the path of what do good choices look like, how do we figure this thing out that this model gives rise to?
Right, I think that's plenty and I hope that this landed.