Actually just got out of a really fantastic conversation and wanted to shoot a quick recording of one of the notions that got some clarity. I apologize if I'm actually repeating myself, I've really frankly lost track of most of what has been said in these videos. But this is interesting enough that it bears repeating. And certainly I'll say it differently. So if you're familiar with philosopher named Conte, he made a distinction between what he called the noumenal and the phenomenal The noumenal is reality such as it actually is, and phenomenal is that thing which we can actually ever under any circumstances actually be in relationship with perceptually.
So, you know, look out the window and I see a tree in point of fact, all I'm able to really say about it is that I the way that my eyes perceive light and The way that light relates to tree, at least in my understanding of physics and optics generates the notion that there's a tree there.
But in some deep, fundamental way, I can't ever actually have direct access to its noumenal. essence. So what I want to do is I actually want to talk about this fact is being a fact of reality. But it's actually more important than just an interesting observation because it creates an intrinsic gap. And that intrinsic gap is what's interesting. So if you imagine this notion of the noumenal, and then the notion of the phenomenal one of the critiques of content that was actually quite nice, is evolution seems to actually work by the process of giving us feedback from the noumenal itself, which is to say this the sad look in front of me and I'm taking a walk and I noticed that there's a very deep hole that leads to jagged rocks.
Now, this is a phenomenal observation. I am phenomenally experiencing something that I can describe to you as Such. However, if I fall into the hole and die, that fact, the fact of my death is inviting noumenal event Now, of course, is a specific event that I can't actually experience it all phenomena but evolution which proceeds by fitness, which is in fact, actually just a cashing out of the degree to which the noumenal phenomenon reinforced choices made by phenomenal agents is a very interesting dynamic. So I actually have is a relationship I have the relationship of what is actually happening at the new middle level, and then the relationship of what is perceived to be the case at the phenomenal level, which now I'm proposing is, in fact, an ontological gap. that gap is just going to exist full stop, but it's a gap that actually has a really interesting relationship. It's not that the numeral it's kind of exists out of nowhere space that we can kind of think about it. We're interested in being German philosophers.
It's a way of naming that thing which we can't ever fully comprehend or perceive, but Nonetheless, actually is the cashing out of how we interrelate with that which exists. So So then we talk about how that shows up in terms of how we make choices. We have a problematic, which is we're always going to be operating with once some sort of sense making schema is the phenomenal, right? The phenomenal is the sense making, we're experiencing phenomena and we're endeavoring to make sense of it so that we can make better choices. Our choices are then going to involve actions that go into the new mo reality are going to cash out through the new middle channel in the actual fitness that it shows up for right. And so this is how we end up in this really interesting problem space or opportunity space which is let's say I have a situation where I am making a choice based upon my phenomenal turris sticks. That is ultimately about bad choice, right now, here's where we're talking about something like say, being in delusion.
Delusion is when you end up choosing to connect with and hold the integrity of your phenomenal schema, your sense making framework rather than allowing it to change under more fundamental feedback from the noumenal. Now one may wonder how is it the one goes about actually ever perceiving that more fundamental feedback from the noumenal. And this is actually a subject of a different conversation, which when I call it intelligence in depth, which I think also is a very interesting thing that I talked about two days ago. I'm going to talk about some other interesting things. So, you're always going to be faced, sorry, the language of wants and needs. So you you want at the level of the surface of your phenomenal schema. You need at the level of depth. And then there's something that is in fact below what you need, which is the new middle, but you will be able to perceive that noumenal precisely through the degree to which it cascades of your needs. And we'll give you a concrete example. But say that you, you, you feel thirsty. 
Alright, so what's happening is think about the stack of sense making frameworks that are actually handing this notion up. You feel thirsty, what that really means is that you have some sense of say your lips are dry, which mine are or a sense that your eyes are dry or a sense of just being low energy or sense of something that you have begun the process of constructing a way of making sense of that you now name as being thirsty now on top of that, you're then going to have a higher order schema which is okay how do you respond to it? And let's say you've got a dysfunctional let's say your your your senses, I'm 30 therefore, I'm going to drink a coke my villain is of the moment. That actually turns out to be a bad choice making schema, right? I've got a sense making framework that is, in fact accurately telling me on Thursday, but the sense making schema that's on top of that and saying actually I want a coke, right? So wants and needs actually have a whole space in between them. And the white spaces is the connection between sense and choice. Want is Ah, okay, what I want is what choice do I make and senses what need Am I trying to fulfill and as we've mentioned in the past, one of the problems we face with him as humans is we're really bad at that gap like we were really really bad at being able to connect Good choice making good sense make which is a really bad at connecting our wants to our needs. But I'm going to describe the need structure and more depth because what happens is this.
So I sense that I'm thirsty.
Well, what's happening there what's what's what's actually happening is something more along the lines of there was an actual presence of my body of an inadequacy of h2o molecules. What does that mean? What's actually happening there is there's an actual presence in my body of an adequacy of the appropriate substrate components for well functioning, metabolism at the level of mitochondria, for example, what's happening there? What's happening there is the homeostatic feedback systems that are necessary for the well functioning of my adaptive strategies in my environment are being pushed out of optimality. Well, funding what's happening there is becoming less fit. Right. And so now we've looped all the way from the phenomenal to the noumenal thing I'm becoming less fit is being parsed at micro micro levels, kind of what's that called leveraging up or trim tightening up from super sensitive components that are probably billions of years old, you know, ATP systems, not getting the resource flow that they needed in sensors that are indicating that and up regulating it all the way up to my you know, choice making human This is going out and buying a mechanical Open, glug glug glug. So now we have this really interesting concept where we're going to notion now the width the numeral fits in relationship to the phenomenal phenomenal has a relationship between choice making is the feedback from the phenomenal to noodle and make a choice that via coke I'm not connecting physical reality and then shifting my state in actual noumenal reality whatever it is, which then cycles all the way back around and through this micro micro macro trip happening thing to how it actually cashes out okay shit, it turns out by making the continuing choice to drink coke I'm not satisfying the actual underlying needs for fitness I'm becoming less fit and something happens
in this case, maybe I die. And of course now fan evolution is now sent a very very strong signal to the thing that used to be me then any good choices, remove whatever fucking, you know, huge, gigantic genetic, epigenetic, emotional, cognitive, phenomenal thing that was me from at least the thing that evolution is pushing. Well, I could go all over the place after that, but I think that's that he will stop there and but that's again.