Roll. Let's try yet another one. I guess that was a good conversation. So this has to do with fitness landscapes and choices around different strategies and responses fitness landscapes. So remember the concept of fitness landscapes and we had this notion of hills we had this notion of So just imagine x y plan, I'm going to z dimension so like creating hills on a map, and the hill represents the degree to which the strategy at that point in the location is fit, it survives. It's a good reproductive strategy. So saber toothed Tiger in paleo mythic North America is sitting on top of a very high hill, it's a peak predator. It's an adaptive strategy, okay. Now, when you're in a particular circumstance, you're always going to be making choices about how you actually move around that fitness landscape. If you find yourself at the base of the hill, and you begin the process of climbing that hill, that's called a hill climbing strategy. This is a baseline called like the fundamental strategy, it's generally the right thing to do. Now, here's the interesting point, right, here's the extension that I want to make. So think about a saber toothed tiger, it's at the peak. 
Now when you're at the peak, you're an interesting situation, because what ends up happening is, if I refer back to the video that I haven't uploaded yet, but hopefully by the time you watch this will have already been uploaded about the distinctive between the phenomenal and the noumenal will end up happening is as you begin the process of going about climbing a hill, what you end up doing is finding that the responsiveness of your phenomenal schema to the noumenal reality that you find yourself in is actually very effective. That's the whole point of the definition of climbing a hill, your your adaptive strategies are in fact adaptive. And the process of climbing a hill is a process of refinement. It's a process of making your phenomenal strategies, more quick, more more efficient, more effective, right, you're actually needing to clean out stuff that is extraneous, right? You're really tightening in. And kind of in exactly the same way that if you have a telescope exclusively focused on a distant star, you can actually get real clarity on that tiny, tiny point of light. But you can't see anything else. This happens, this is actually just a fundamental trade off. 
So what I wanted to do some introduce now is maybe a new concept, I'm going to call it the generator function of adaptive capacity, or the more generalized adaptive capacity rather than the specialized adaptive capacity. So what ends up happening is you have a generator function, which is just sort of raw exploration of possibility space, and then you have the things that it generates, which are your phenomenal since making a choice making schema, or you can actually feel like this. If you want the generator function, these things kind of come out of it. And if you're the saber tooth tiger winds up happening is that this actually becomes a waste. You don't need to have the ability to edit and update you're carrying stuff that you don't need to have. And what you do is you just keep pushing more and more and more into the surface layer you become all surface you become perfectly efficient, perfectly mapped exquisitely detailed filigreed new fat on this surface so that you are the most effective saber toothed tiger, which is perfect and less than Hill the hill changes, right because now you've lost that thing down here, which is the editing function which changes this thing up here. You've given it up in exchange for local selective advantage. So what ends up happening of course is you've got become brittle and if you if you have any minor change in the hill, then your adaptive capacity begins to go down. But you no longer can respond to it. Your generator function has been given up and this is a trade off right you have these trades to make your all a generator function and no Adaptive strategy, then you suck. You can't do anything in the world you're sort of constantly having to process from first principles. If you're all fundamentally responding to well defined scripts, then you've got generative Grassi. If you recall the video on thinking and not thinking it's the same thing, it's just a more fundamental version of that, that notion.
Now, the other primary strategy that is talked about in evolutionary theory is Valley crossing, right? So this is the capacity to actually go down in local fitness go across some adaptive Valley, which sucks from an evolutionary perspective for some who knows how long or it may actually be just wandering the desert, but under the expectation of at some point finding another hill over here, which is in fact higher or at least one which you can climb to a higher point on. It you can think about that as the ability to integrate time to take it for future potential large payout, take some discount rate of the possibility of actually discovering and finding it, comparing it to Your instantaneous value of where you are now and making the choice of undergoing that longer thing. This shows up by the way in human beings in say, for example, the cookie test, which I understand is actually a really, really effective predictor of the degree to which human beings are able to have life success as children. 
So you take a child, put them in a room, present a cookie in front of them, ideally a really delicious cookie. And you say, Hey, here's the deal. I'm gonna leave, I'm gonna leave this room, and nobody's gonna be here, nobody can see what happens. But if I come back, and there's still a cookie here, you get another cookie. But if you if you eat the cookie while I'm gone, that's the only cookie you get. But you will be punished. It's okay. It's your choice. And then you leave and you see what happens. And the point is that if the kid has the capacity to valid cross the arduous five minutes of being a kid from a delicious cookie. That means they have a generator function that's able to actually do things like sense future value, make discoveries to make a choice. Now, that doesn't pay off now that pays off bigger in the future. That's a valid crossing fundamental. And of course, anybody who has a valid crossing capacity as at age five, may be able to often use that to respond more effectively to the world.
So now we find ourselves this is a generalized problematic.
This is a generalist situation where you have your localized adaptive capacity, you have your generator function, you have the trade off between maintaining the resources and attention and capacity of the ability for the generator function to modify, upgrade and edit the sort of the phenomenal schema and or the effectiveness and efficiency of the phenomenal schema. And this shows up for example, in the famous s curves that describe why and how corporations rise and fall. So I'm an early startup I'm affectively all adapting fast and just generator function a bunch of smart people know quite nd exactly who I am, what I'm doing how to do it. I'm creatively exploring my environment is the biggest bottom of the S curve. I'm not showing up as winning in any meaningful way back. What I'm actually doing here is I'm fairly cross. 
But then I find something that works. Now if it turns out that I found a good Hill, that's how I found search or social media, then I begin the process of actually converting a data generator function into excellence into effectiveness into efficiency into scripts and schemas that are able to work well, quickly, responsibly at low cost with low error. So then I actually entered into the accelerating curve of the Esker, right. And I get to get what shows up as at a phenomenal level, it shows up as winning, right, I actually feel like I'm winning, I'm generating a trade off, I'm converting my generator capacity into what my phenomenal signals are telling me is good. And that's actually true. 
My adaptive capacity is rising at this curve until roughly about the midpoint at the midpoint actually enter into a very interesting switch. And you might call this the addictive switch to the delusional switch, which is that I'm actually still getting Return I'm getting saved. For example, as a corporation, my my profit line is growing. This is actually the point where my profit line is growing at its biggest I've never really won market share. I've gotten really good at it, nobody can compete. So I'm actually generating really really outsized returns was the Golden Age. But my rate of acceleration is actually began to slow down, my velocity might actually be increasing, but my rate of acceleration is slowing down a second derivative. So what is happening is that line is starting to get ready to go here. 
It may not be here yet, but it started you're ready to go here. And this is that that moment from the movie, the matrix where, Lieutenant your men are already dead, you don't know it, you've got a whole bunch of well trained well armed cops getting ready to go in and fight with one little girl. What you don't know is you're a saber tooth tiger and initiates about to go away. You don't know that you've externalized your fundamental generator function into what is now about to become an obsolete set of schema. You just don't know it because the signaling mechanik Isn't that phenomenal noumenal gap has separated out. And you remember that loop that we had in the phenomenal numeral conversation that the signaling mechanisms that actually able to come all the way back and make it conscious that there's something wrong are dwarfed by the signaling mechanism happening at the surface, I'm drinking my coke I'm getting what it is that I need no getting what I want. So now I'm addicted to my wants, I'm aligned to my my underlying needs. I'm even more blind to the fact that I began making choices that take me out of sovereignty, and the top of the curve begins to happen, which means that you are now in senescence as an organism as a corporation. And you're fragile, meaning that if at any meaningful point, the adaptive landscape changes, you're not going to be able to respond and you will die.