So recently it turned out that there was a pretty meaningful response to a short video that someone shot and top of the the glitch in the matrix. And well, it's a lot easier to create a video than it is to try to write things down in a medium post. So I thought I might try creating a series of short videos and see if there's any real interest. Most likely the the viewership of that video is actually generated by the fact that Jordan Peterson tweeted it. So most likely nobody will actually watch these videos, but if some people do and if it has some value that it was worth doing. So here we go as an experiment. The first video I thought I might want to play with an idea it's actually kind of difficult to to explain in writing but might actually be pretty easy to explain in, in video. And I think it's a It's not common currency, I think it's pretty helpful. So the idea is to say that there is, say, in a social environment, we can, we can imagine a couple of different layers. And this is just a useful way of partitioning, certain kind of social phenomenon. So we might say, for example, there's a financial layer that is about the way that money flows and agreements around money works. 
There's an economic layer, which is about physical infrastructure, about skills about the distribution and resources and where people are working and things like that. There is the socio political layer, which is things like both the effectiveness the legitimacy, trust in various kinds of social institutions, including schools and government, things like that. And then there's the the cultural layer, which is kind of the degree to which people in a given society share values and most important they consider each other to be inside some kind of cultural loop. whereby they don't treat each other as either arm's length trading partners or even worse as potential enemies. And so the first idea is that you could think about a social environment using those those layers. And the second, and in this case that the more important point is to think about the way that the layers can actually be traded off against each other. So, specifically, I quite specifically imagine what happened in in 2008, during the 2008 financial crisis, that whether this is an consciously or unconsciously a decision was made to prevent or inhibit the negative consequences at the financial and to a lesser but very important extent economic layer by actually spending resources or burning resources at the social, political and even at the cultural level, right. 
So you might imagine that roughly around the time that Say for example tarp, and the various bailout decisions were being made, that it could have gone either way. And that we could have, for example, allowed the too big to fail entities to fail. And this would have had negative consequences that certainly the financial level and negative consequences, probably at the economic level, and even negative consequences at the political level, people who've had some, you know, as the pain of crushing market to the pain of unemployment got passed on to the people, they would have probably been very unhappy at a political level may have voted the rascals out. However, it would have kept it in that border. Right. So eventually, as the negative consequence of the financial crisis played its way out and say all the banks disappeared, some kind of new approach, say, for example, Google innovating an entirely novel way of handling banking questions, or the emergence of an entirely different regime would have come into place and we would have moved forward with Effectively no damage being done at the cultural level. Instead, a choice was made to save bail out the the too big to fail entities protect the integrity of the financial system and the economic layer model as we currently have it.
And I would propose that this was being done at the cost of political particular, and also at the cost of cultural capital. So, quite specifically, what I would say is that things like the Trump phenomenon and Brexit are directly and linearly connected to the various bailouts that happened in the United States in Europe, that it was a direct subsidy, the political and cultural they're subsidized the economic and the financial layer at cost to the political and cultural layer. And so as an example of a similar historical circumstance, you can take a look at What happened in the United States and Germany in the context of the Great Depression in the 1930s, that in the United States, the financial the Depression hit the financial layer quite badly. It burned down to the economic layer hit the economic layer quite badly. It burned down to the political layer, which is to say that the republicans were voted out and the democrats were voted in. And you had a meaningfully significant change to the nature of what American politics looked like. vastly more centralization on the executive. But it didn't meaningfully burn down to the cultural level and in many ways, it actually made the cultural level stronger.
By contrast, in Germany, the financial crisis went to hyperinflation which vaporized the entire financial system, which hammered the economic system and led to terrible, terrible economic depression, which in fact, went all the way down and vaporize the political layer and led to the collapse of the Weimar Republic was in of course, even better Gender, the cultural layer and lead to things like the Holocaust were Germans turned against Germans and the notion of what it even meant to be part of a culture became problematized. So, so this is the framework. And the the proposition is that we are now currently living out the consequences of that that decision, and that the progress the decision to the choice to continue to subsidize and support the financial layer and the economic layer at the cost of the political and the cultural layer is risky, because it the layers work in that direction, meaning the Cultural Foundation is foundational, and while it may be unhappy to endure a financial crisis, it is catastrophic to endure a cultural crisis. Civil Wars happen when you have political breakdown. Genesis genocides happen when you have cultural breakdown, and so It might be useful to think about these costs explicitly when choices are being made in response to various challenges as they come up over the next couple of years.