So, recently I found myself thinking about the question of net neutrality. And in thinking about this, I was reminded of a distinction that I first encountered, gosh, maybe 20 years ago from Larry Lessig, between different ways that human societies can go about constructing how we do things together, specifically, the distinctions between laws, norms and code. So first I just lay out the distinction is and then maybe do a little bit of thinking about how it can be applied this question of net neutrality. So norms are the baseline in many ways that the base mechanism the human societies used to condition the behavior of, of members.
You know, the norm might be, don't speak too loudly when you're in a public place, or a norm might be. Always wear clothes, things like that. And the basic idea is that human beings are very sensitive for obvious long term Aboriginal travel reasons, to the, the social esteem or social center of other members of the tribe. And so when we go about doing things that are in violation of social norms, we receive some kind of social center. And that inhibits our behavior. Shame is actually a an aspect of this mechanic. And as a consequence, by the way, norms show up is a very powerful mechanism for social behavioral management, in small, tight knit communities. If we all grow up in the same place, we all grew up together, we all grew up sharing the same norms. On the one hand, everybody more or less understands what those norms are. And on the other hand, people have more agency in in enforcing the norms. And so as a consequence, the norms work out pretty well. Where's by contrast, if we're in an environment where let's say a very large cosmopolitan city with a very high erogenous group of people who don't want to flow through it, where it's not obvious to any person who interact with me even share the norms that that you have norms and it being vastly less important in conditioning behavior. 
There's still a baseline of norms constantly. But they cover a much larger percentage of human behaviors. And for good, and for ill, I mean, there's whole critiques of small towns and how insular they can be. And then we come to loss. So in the case of a law, we're looking at something which is, in some sense, a relatively modern invention. We've been doing norms for hundreds of thousands of years, probably actually more in the direction of small digit millions. Laws, we've been having identification Hummer up his code, the notion of creating explicit code, and in specific enforcement mechanism mechanisms, to again condition, human behavior. And I would suggest that I guess, Rome was Well known for its explicit laws by Santana, which is well known for its explicit laws. And then the modern era, the emergence of Republic's constitution Republic's, which are founded on a founding document in the domain of law, are some of the characteristics societies where law has been central and crucial. And so laws it is a situation where there is some some explicit articulation of what is appropriate behavior in some mechanism for evaluating whether or not somebody violated the law and then enforce it against those violations. Pretty straightforward. I think we're all pretty familiar with that, that modality. 
And if we extend that to include regulatory agencies, which I think is necessary, then we can say that the 20th century, I think, has been the high watermark of both the presentation of the penetration of law into social life and its specificity and nuance. So with with the ability to use regulation, right Sorry agencies, we developed a, you know, quite robust capacity for law to modulate human behavior. And again for good and thrill, and it has certainly succeeded in certain ways and failed in other ways. Which then brings us to the third category. The third category is code. Now, code is omnipresent in the form of the laws of nature. So, that which goes up must come down as a nice pithy example of code. And it shows up also in Human Design. So, the way that we say design our urban environments, if there simply is not a road here, then driving here is, if not impossible, at least difficult that there's not a bridge to crossing the cat Canyon has certain conditions. So, oftentimes we will perceive code is shown up in biological or in architectural constraints most for most of history. And sometimes it in fact, is I think what this had to make it explicit is simply implicit that we just accept code as being well get the laws of nature, the context in which laws and norms play out. But his point is that we've now entered into an era where we have enough power. And we live in such a not just a built environment, but a fluidly built environment in the context, particularly software, that code is now coming into its own.
And so it's kind of just put it in context by giving you a simple example that includes all three. Let's say that, that there is a sense or a choice or a shared sentiment that it turns out that if you park a car on a hill, if you don't park the wheels pointing the right way, sometimes the car will roll down the hill to disastrous consequences. And so we've decided that it's a good idea to park your wheels a certain movie park on Hill, in the land of norms, this will show up as it is just what to do and to violate that norm will involve other people sending you social signals that you've done something wrong. icky. Disgusting that maybe they put a flyer underneath your windshield wiper telling you that you're doing bad things or they just give you dirty looks or whatever. And don't let it ruin was this social feed that would be enough to condition your behavior and everybody would do the right thing. Obviously, in the modern era, we're all familiar with the fact that this is against the law in most places. And so in this case, what ends up happening is that first is a law that you must do this is codified in some fashion. 
And then if you fail to do it, the police are empowered to put the piece of paper into your week job, in this case in the form of a ticket. And it comes associated that with dirty looks, but some kind of fine, or possibly even potentially Delta, some sort of enforcement mechanism that is designed to make it so that you make the mental calculus of well, it's more costly to run the risk of getting caught and being enforced against than it is to just do the thing that the last tells me to do. And so generally speaking, everybody chooses to do the things a lot as you do. So it's a kind of a utilitarian calculus. Oliver Wendell Holmes model within code. So in the code case, what ends up happening is you could imagine, say, you have a Tesla car that has a software control structure and some pretty robust AI. And there's just a code update that causes the car itself by itself, that when it finds itself parked on a hill to turn the wheels the right way. So what's notable about code is that, on the one hand, it has this sensibility of ease that we don't have to deal with enforcement. No, we don't have to deal with compliance, it just, it just is it just is the way that it is. And so on the one hand, it's nice, it's very, very easy. On the other hand, of course, it is a form of tyranny that is never really ever going to show up in the lands of laws or norms. To to wrap around code actually requires an enormous amount of capacity. You literally have to be able to hack the software in your car to avoid this thing happening. And so as we're entering into the into the era of code, it is now crucial, be mindful again. 
At the difference between code and law and norms, and the difference in potential, the different kinds of things that we can do that simply cannot be done at all in the world of laws or norms. And also the pitfalls, the things that happen when we are not careful. Joe Edelman, for example, has written extensively on the degree to which we are already very much known in the world of code, say, for example, in the ways that we can interact as a consequence of the architectural choices that were made by designers living far away in the social media structures, or the, you know, the phone app structures that we interact with, you know, if your, if your app only has a thumbs up thumbs down, then that just constrains your behavior, regardless of your choice, and very effectively Shut up. So then let's think about this in the context of net neutrality. 
And on the one hand, recently, there's been a major change in the state of the law. And I noticed for example, that that for example, AT&T Corporation, overtly called on the Senate, or Congress, to formally reregulate net neutrality to pull it out of the hands of a regulatory agency and codify it more fundamentally in the form of law. And this was the event that brought this distinction to my mind. Because honestly, I sort of aesthetically felt it was a little bit old fashioned to imagine that Congress and legislative law making is appropriate, capable, effective in in attempting to solve this problem. And that, it seems to me just sort of intuitively, that perhaps we should more closely consider code as the modality that is right here, and how to do that. So for example, that the code approach would not be along the lines of, let's decide what good behavior is and then and then regulate or our articulate that in some language. Well that articulate that in a law, but rather, how do we actually design it into the architecture itself. So for example, one could imagine code in net neutrality by creating a very, very decentralized physical intranet, where it would become impossible for anyone to force people to constrain their speech in some important way, just because the ability to route around that kind of censorship or the ability to route around that kind of friction would just be intrinsically so hard because the nature of the way the network itself was architected that you would need to regulate it, it would just be foolishly unnecessary. And this sort of stuff actually does exist in certain circumstances. 
You, if you observe, for example, the way that Bitcoin was very carefully architected without any access or capacity to use laws, it did actually You have the ability to access norms, and that does show up. But it is predominantly built around the ability to use code to condition behavior. And in this case, it had to imagine game theoretic models of how people would make different choices around when they would apply their resources to mining and when with a defect, and how would you police into this? In some sense, the essence of Bitcoin is to consider how does one build relatively complex social systems almost exclusively out of code. And being as we are in this era of code, I would put it to you to, to consider and to think about how we can go about solving problems like net neutrality, using code. why that might be in fact, not just the best and maybe even the only way in the contemporary environment moving as rapidly as it does. And how do we build the collective skillfulness to do so? Well, recognizing the enormous hazards that are associated with building things into lots of nature.