Episode 11 coherence, I'm going to try to just run this one off the top of my head because I keep trying too hard as I can independent. I apologize if the audio sucks. I've got a friend, a local friend who's volunteered to come in and help set this thing up. So the audio doesn't suck. And it is too bothersome. I'll just reshoot this whole thing. But in the meantime, let's give it a shot. So coherence.
In order to do that concept, we have to actually do a different concept called resonance. And this one I think, is pretty easy. I've got some experience in metaphors and seems to work so for residents this just use the metaphor of tuning into an old analog radio station. FM. 
So you've got a 99.7 is the radio station and you'll be it will do it for broadcasting a signal in the electromagnetic spectrum. We're pumping a lot of energy into that signal. But the receiver, if you're even slightly off the frequency, it just doesn't there's no offense, you're just you're turning your dial here. 9798 99 99.1 9.2 is still just static, all noise, no signal, you get to 99.5. Maybe you start here, just the edge of signal 9.6. And okay, now you could hear the stage into the station, there is still a huge amount of noise in it 9.7 and bam, you're locked. And you can just hear almost all signal and almost a noise. And so you're running, your receiver and the transmitter are on the same resonant frequency and bam, the amount of energy discovered a signal just as a massive spike. So resonance system has that characteristic of very low signal to noise that we would expect wherever the resonance frequency happens to be. And this is a profoundly important characteristic of reality. 
If you're in a system that has resonances feature, then a couple of things are just straight up. required. If you are out of resonance, then the only meaningful thing to do is to figure out how to get interested because otherwise, you're just basically wasting all of your energy on something, which is a massive amount of noise, or heat if you like, like comparison. And by contrast, if you could find a resonance frequency, then you can actually do stuff like interesting things can happen that otherwise might not seem possible at all, because there's a massive game that can happen in resonant frequency. Okay, so so so with resonance, we can now start talking about the concept of coherence, what I'd like to build it up in a series of stages. And I'll do coherence in the in the domain of people's success, the object that I care about, although it might also be useful to maybe switch into other dimensions to get the concept a little bit richer. So imagine you've got a room that has say 10 1520 people in it, and let's go ahead and assign each discrete individual, a level of sovereignty from Episode 10 sovereignty, obviously, using an integer and you kind of metric to define sovereignty is already a travesty. But for purposes of this, let's just do it. So let's say just everybody has a sovereignty of thought. Okay, so now now the individuals are in this group they're floating about and to the differences column A and B. They somehow come into each other's awareness, there's some connection communication event. So step along with coherences communication is a very, very light communication. So it's just a channel that's forming how to channel bandwidth of one, which is the lowest level possible communications occurring between the two. And at this point, a choice event occurs, either they can endeavor to increase their communication bandwidth, which in this case might be going from eye contact to walking up towards each other and beginning a conversation or they can just continue to just go there and what the communication breaks down.
Back up.
So let's assume the choices made now moved into a stronger communication. So now what's happening is that there's a whole bunch of stuff going on, which, broadly speaking is mostly most important aspects are in fact endeavouring to figure out how to find what a resonance frequency might be like various kinds of articulations language sending over big packages of concepts. Because obviously, as human beings the the metaphor of resonant frequency isn't just insane. To communication channel itself, it's also in the state of the consciousness, the state of the model on either side, and how those states actually themselves in or out of resonance. 
So if we can kind of get on the same page and build a shared language and become increasingly sensitive to how will give an individual expresses themselves like you. How did how do I express myself through facial Express etc express myself your hands, tone of voice, word choice, body language, etc, etc, we can build the capacity for doing exchange, and I'm going to call this relationship. So we're coming into relationship. And that's stage two. So to the degree to which we spend the time and effort and have skillfulness, or just sheer luck of the draw, but we actually do come into relationship a week and we shift into something in the domain of resonance, then what happens, of course, is that the channel opens up wise and safe instead of a communication channel one, whenever communication channel eight. Now at this point, we're entering into something where we have the ability to relate to each other in a generative fashion.
And I'm going to call that coordination. So we're able to communicate effectively to communicate quite well.
And as a consequence, we can actually share information and we can share state and we're able to do things that are near to our mutual benefit. So now we're at the stage of coordination. 
And that's a good place to be. And you can look at agreements, and we can make choices that are compatible and self reinforcing. But we're now at another choice threshold.
At this level, we now have a possibility of moving into the process of actually generating here.
And what happens when you move into the space of coherence is that there's an emergent property that develops. It may sound a bit esoteric, and there's ways that we can actually make it sound less esoteric was just Danny as a character name for now, which is there's a synergy value that develops where the relationship itself begins to have its own qualities of sovereignty has its own agency's own perception, its own sense making which is more than the sum of the parts I certainly coordination. We get this in a very lightweight There's some kind of Win Win synergy that can emerge in coherence, that synergy actually begins to have its own sovereignty. And so you might say, for example, that in coordination, we maybe have increased the sovereignty of A and B for five, and five to six and six. So each individual sovereignty is increased. In coherence, we're now beginning to have a process whereby there's an A, there's a B, and there's a union of a and b. And so a is it 60 is it safe with the union maybe is one is a new thing, a new phenomenon, a new sovereignty in reality that is happening as a consequence of the increasing quality and qualities of the relationship between the two ages. Now, the the next move and the kind of key moves that makes coherence finally come into place, is that precisely to the degree that this New sovereignty exercises is its agency so as to reinforce the ongoing relationship and the quality of that relationship such that it increases the sovereignty of the relationship right so it's a it's a recursive relationship begins to have its own sovereignty emerges as a phenomenon. 
And then it actually has the ability to use its sovereignty to maintain and increase the quality of its sovereignty. So now we're in coherence. We have something where there's a bottoms up causation the individuals in relationship generating something but there's something now as he bought a top down causation, that conditions the relationships was to maintain the existence of the thing. Shifting domain, we met a mention, for example, organelles in a cell, I was Tom makitas, the organelles, but now there's a cell membrane, the cell membrane generates a feedback that conditions the continuing Presence of the organelles in relationship with each other. So the organism relationship give rise to the potential of their B cell.
The conditions of the cell, though they give rise to the root, the coordination of relationships with the individual organelles. And this whole thing back and forth, is intact, coherent. 
We can also do this in the context of city, the body, which is just a map reversion to the previous I've got a whole bunch of cells, my own genetic cells, as well as my microbiome and all the other bacteria and of course, throughout my body, and each one has its own agency as an individual cell. But and together they coordinate to generate the possibility space that shows up as my body, my tissues, my organs, and the whole system that hangs together. And but then that system generates a series of causal effects that maintain the possibility and the coordination of the individual cells. So this whole thing is coherent. And then our have a coherent system. And that's that person, then you could just say you've got a you've got the you got union and A and B, and you have the ability of the Union to have causal effect on a and b and you have a because of causal effect on the currency, the sovereignty, the sovereignty of the sovereignty team.
So then there's another possible stage. And I think it's important to get this distinction because otherwise people might throw plaques and that is community. I'm just gonna call it what I mean. But communion is a circumstance where the larger system called the whole or the union not only maintains the integrity of the relationship so as to continue itself, but it does so in a fashion that actually reduces the sovereignty of the lower level components the individuals anb the cell so the body is that that's what the body is a form of community, where the cells do of course still have some sovereignty, but their sovereignty itself is quite constrained by virtue of being in the community known as the body. Otherwise, they'll show up as cancer cells and they'll be policed by the immune system, identify them as be in violation and will destroy them. 
And so there are forms of that that's a forum where, where you give coordination to coherence to Communion.
And, you know, sometimes that what was selected for that works. But it's important to recognize that coherence is not community. It's a different state, you good coordination, you've got me you've got coherence. And this this piece is really important. The reason why coherence is able to maintain is precisely the degree to which participating in the relationship actually is a good choice for the members of the relationship, that by virtue of being in relationship, my sovereignty increases my capacity to make good choices increases would say is simply a consequence of my choice or this thing, this coherence continues to maintain, not coercively. But actually just because it is, in fact a good choice for the members to continue to participate in. 
And in the way that the system maintains that is by virtue of just providing that. So you might imagine, for example, you know, just a classic example of being in a good relationship.
If you're in a good relationship, the relationship is committed to the continuing increase of the well being of the sovereignty of the members of the relationship. And so by virtue of being in the relationship, you're just doing better than not, so it's just a good choice. And by virtue of being in the relationship, because you're in relationship, you're able to afford the capacity to improve your well being and so just kind of this awesome, constant feedback loop. Positive improvement, and that's the sweet spot. You don't have to follow him to Communion. You don't have to default to coordination, there is this thing coherence and this is the fabric out of which any viable future society must be built. It's the sweet spot to agency and communion, is coherence. And I think that's that. We can talk a lot about one of the tools, the toolkit of coherence building, things like awareness and self awareness, and then relationship awareness, things like discernment skillfulness in communication and agreement formation, and relationship building, and strength, coherence can actually be measured in strength, which is the degree to which the decoherence can endure forces that are pushing on it, while maintaining its integrity.
So these are all maybe things to talk about in another video. That's pretty interesting.