Okay, today I want to try to see if I can rule out two different related concepts. The first concept comes from a gentleman named Max neef. These are called satisfiers. And the second concept is my own, and I called reinvention. So satisfiers The idea here is to recognize that human societies come together to, among other things, find ways to more effectively satisfy human needs. So for example, we have some number of basic human needs that we're endeavoring to figure out how to how to resolve we need to eat we need to sleep. And we construct two different solutions to finding ways to satisfy those needs. So imagine that back in the old days, we would figure out different tools and techniques for hunting or for gathering and for preparing the things that are gathered into edible food and these are satisfiers. And these are culturally invented, culturally propagated tools. In the modern era, we go out to a restaurant or we make money and go to grocery store on occasion and maybe grow our own food. But the idea is that this is a basic general framework, the idea of satisfiers. And the important inside of satisfiers is to recognize that there's two components. 
One is the underlying need, the thing that actually in the sense is very solid and enduring, under most societies to eat is going to be a problem to be solved. And then there's the the much more ephemeral, actual satisfier the way do we go about doing it? Now, if you think about the frameworks from some of the previous episodes around, I didn't describe the tractors yet but finish landscapes are reasonably close or face spaces or the way that complicated systems feedback in on each other in the tantric plus model. We can also notice that satisfiers tend to get entangled with each other. So for example, as I described earlier, if you want to go to the grocery store to buy food, you also need to figure out how to go about getting money to be able to buy the food. So now the the food satisfier is linked up also to another satisfier associated with this case, productivity and how to produce goods and services in the economy. So within the satisfier concept is only a few more things to roll out and then I can move on to reinvention. 
One is that we can actually notice that satisfiers can be related in a bit of a continuum, that the good satisfiers that as far as the defectively go about meeting our needs. And then there are satisfiers that are less effective at meeting our needs. But better than good satisfiers are in fact, wouldn't have called synergistics satisfiers. So this is a set of stars. Maybe meets multiple needs simultaneously. Say for example, going on a picnic which might meet needs around being in nature and conviviality that could have been possibly surfacing potential meeting opportunities or creative collaboration opportunities in addition to eating, which is very different than, say, having pizza delivered to your house and just eating it. And then the opposite side of the spectrum are satisfiers that show up as meeting your need. But don't say for example, let's say a piece of fast food that doesn't actually have any nutritional value, or even worse is the satisfier that actually makes the problem worse. 
So say for example, a beverage like say Coca Cola, that presents itself is satisfy the need for thirst for water, but in fact, actually makes you thirsty. Okay, so that's the continuum of satisfiers. To keep in mind. So now to the topic of reinvention, if we, if we notice that we are surrounded by a social media, you have different satisfiers that are operating at differential levels of effectiveness on this continuum. Some are synergistic, and some are in fact inhibitory. And yet we also notice that there are fundamental human needs and the set of stars relate to each other very complicated fashion. We can then imagine grasping a particular social institution that shows up in the contemporary environment, in the environment that we're in and endeavor to undergo a process that I'm calling reinvention. 
So, let's take journalism exam as an example. So first order we to reinvent we have to recognize that the single That we are dealing with is a satisfier, not the underlying need itself. So journalism is not meaningful or not meaningfully understood as say, for example, the media itself. journalism is not newspapers, journalism is not TV news. It's not even meaningfully the processes that work within and give rise to those institutional structures. So journalism is not what you learn in journalism school. Journalism isn't the processes about how one goes about doing good editorial. These are all functional adaptive structures inside a particular institutional framework that to a greater or lesser extent, makes that framework actually deliver on the need, but they aren't the thing itself. So So the thing we have to do is we have to in some sense of turn up the temperature at a conceptual level and boil away the accidents boiler with the artifacts of how We have gone about satisfying, certainly, until we get closer and closer to that much more solid and during court what that need might be. So in the case of journalism, we might say that the, the essence of the core of journalism is a deeply fundamental social need to effectively source and disseminate and make sense of our environment at a social level. 
So to use the concepts of sovereignty, journalism, is associated with the perception and the intelligence, portions of sovereignty at a social level. And so, there are many of us. And you might imagine, for example, in the older times, that there's a good hunting ground over there. And so journalism is the process where the people who have discovered that information, bring it back and share that information with the larger tribe so that that information is effectively disseminated throughout the whole. And now the whole can now process that information. Perhaps an elder has an interesting insight on previous times we've had similar situations and the collective intelligence is able to make better choices and engage in more effective activity. So as part of a form of group sovereignty. And as such, you might say that the the journalism is actually neatly connected to science. 
Science is also part of that same complex, it tends to maybe go more in depth about getting more clarity on what is the nature of things will grow, what is what is true, where the journalism is more about what is but these two things are related very closely into the broader problem of collective sense making. And so we can then do is okay, great. Let's take the recognition that things change and that one particular satisfier have an underlying need. Say for example, The newspapers and television news that we develop during the 19th and 20th century may need to be reinvented. So great. We'll do we just did turn the temperature up, we'll try to cause ourselves to be able to separate from the the frameworks and architectures that exists now, boil it down to the core essence recognize there's this really deep and during social function. 
And then the last step is then begin the process of endeavoring to redesign satisfiers in the contemporary environment. Okay, great. We certainly do need to have a capacity to do social sense and can do collaborative sense making. But we actually have new tools, we have new mechanisms to go about gathering information from the edge perspectives from a larger social whole. Bringing that information and putting it in the hands are in the minds of those individuals or groups who are most effectively able to make sense of it and then allow that sense making itself to propagate out so that people have access to the best perspective and the best wisdom that's available in the larger hole. Okay, so then then we just need to start thinking about what does that look like in the contemporary environment? And what I'd like to do just to close and I think I'm getting to the end of the, the attention span of the contemporary human is thinking about this in the context of the complicated in the complex. 
We have a proposition that we are reaching the end of the useful life of complicated structures, and that perhaps the the appropriate approach as we're engaging in redesigns or engaging in reinvention is to contemplate how we might solve problems, how we might generate satisfiers in a, in a fashion that is more fully in alignment with complexity. And so here for example, our friend Dave Snowden has already Done deep work, he's proposed an approach because the human sensor network, whereby every individual human, symmetrical meaning everybody plays a role in sensing the environment, and then in providing that sensing, and since making back into a shared social value, and then also in curating what is from perception into sense and then finally into meaning. And then this can then be handed off to a different structure that's associated with choice making. I think that's all I want to do right now. If there's interest perhaps in the next video, I'll dig a little bit deeper into what this human sensor network might look like and how it quite distinctly is different from social media and different from a very pure information approach that is this weird intermediary space between the complicated in the complex that is The kind of the instinctual response that we have, without thinking deeply about the nature of what our what the needs are that we're trying to solve with the tools are that we have to solve them with.