This episode is once again and effort to combine a concept that's already been articulated, in this case in a medium post, with the medium of video, YouTube, to hopefully elucidate the concept more effectively. This concept is sovereignty. And of course, I'll go into some detail about what I mean by that in a moment. For those of you who want to delve more deeply into that concept, my I'll include a link to the medium post below. So the idea is that we can reconceptualize this concept of sovereignty using a new framework. And the point is that I think that this new framework is a good deep way of anchoring sovereignty and a more foundational fashion that is appropriate to the set of problems that we face today. And in point of fact, I use this concept often and we'll probably quite likely refer to it in other other videos.
So it's effectively a triadic structure, the notions there's three distinct underlying capacities that are associated with to be sovereign, and also that your sovereignty then represents a sort of general purpose, capacity to respond to the world. So as the simplest sense of what it means. So to say that you are sovereign is to say that within a certain context and in a certain set of circumstances, you have the capacity to take responsibility for your circumstances to respond to the environment that you're in, as opposed to sitting overwhelmed by it, or to react to it, etc. So this is the coordination. But we can actually decompose that and then reconfigure it and bring it back together. And the way that I think is very powerful, very timely, in a contemporary environment.
For those of you who are familiar with a boy toodaloo, which is four points, observe, orient, decide act and kind of imagine the three that I described as being the blank space in between, and maybe I'll reference that as we go through it. So the first aspect of sovereignty is, is perception capacity to receive information from your environment. And this particular capacity has three primary characteristics. One you might think of as being the modalities of perception. So for example, vision is a different modality and smell which is different modality than hearing. And this distinction modality is very important because different modalities of perception have very different qualities, there are things that you can see that you cannot hear, and things you can hear that you cannot see no matter how much acuity your vision your hearing happened to have. And the fact that the reality happens to be partitioned to that way, it's actually quite interesting. But in any event, modality and the number of modalities with which you go about perceiving is a fundamental characteristic of your underlying capacity of perception.
Another one, though, is bandwidth. So bandwidth has to do with the amount of information flow you can actually receive through a given modality. So this is both in terms of the continuation the total possibility so within the electromagnetic magnetic spectrum, for example, what what portion of that spectrum can you see, and then also the velocity, the actual amount of information flow that's coming at you that you can process effectively, at least through your perceptual lens. And then the last characteristic is subtlety or discernment in perception. And this has to do with the ability to not just perceive kind of raw bandwidth, maybe a little bit of the distance between say a telescope and a microscope, or a telescope has a capacity to have subtlety in the direction of distance. a microscope has the capacity of something in the direction of very small and so those are obviously two very, very different capacities within what maybe the same bandwidth in the same modality, vision.
And then all of this perceptions in the context of overwhelm, because while your instruments of perception have certain capacity, is to proceed. They also have certain thresholds after which the capacity itself is degraded. So you've got sort of an upper limit of what you can receive. But then you also have a degree to which signals outside of that limit, actually degraded capacity. So if you listen to a loud noise, you then lose your hearing capacity to center your timer. A flash of light makes it harder to see for some period of time.
And so to the degree to which you are able to increase modality, increase bandwidth, increased subtlety and increase your capacity to perceive without being overwhelmed, you've been increased this dimension of sovereignty, this is the procession dimension of sovereignty.
And then you have the the second dimension, which is the dimension perhaps of processing or intelligence, and the hand up between the two is the dimension of sense making. And so in the second category, we're talking about ability to take perception to convert it into meaning. And again, this hasn't been characteristics, you have things like your raw processing speed, how much information can you take in and convert, it may be that you're getting overwhelmed at the level of, of intelligence, not the level of perception.
But also other things that map a little bit to vocality and bandwidth and subtlety, for example, your capacity to develop frameworks of abstraction so that you can actually take large amounts of raw information and decompose it into structures and patterns and models. Your modeling capacity is a component of, of intelligence or processing, and then pattern recognition, your ability to notice and detect patterns because you that compress and use as objects that you can plug into your models. So these are all aspects of intelligence and and now it's also important to recognize the feedback between the two modes are the two domains. So you have a few several, if you have a hearing and a vision of reality and perception, you're going to need to have a hearing and vision processing capacity. And then also, broadly speaking, you'll need to have a binding capacity, which is to, to compare the inputs from those two different modes, and convert them into some bound model of the reality in which you're operating. That takes advantage of the paradox of comparison. 
And then then the other side of the intelligence capacity is going from making sense of your environment to making meaning every environment we're making choices. And this is the boy models at the decide side of the equation. So here, what's happening is you're not comparing the input with the environment is telling you what's going on two possible outputs. And this of course, is largely both modeling your own state what's your portfolio of possible actions, what can you do viably and then sort of a sense of what might be effective in your environment, your strategy and plan and then this this boundary condition and connects to the third capacity, which is properly speaking your your capacity to actually act your genetic capacity per se. So, this is going to clean the portfolio of actions that you have available to you can you walk, can you talk Can you write software code? The, the efficiency with which you can project your will into the world meeting with the ratio of effect to energy? Is it very, very difficult to you spend a lot of energy getting a small effect or can you deliver on the effect that you desire with a very small amount of energy.
But also, for example, the ability to avoid unintended consequences. Are you a bull in a china shop are you delivering what you want, but also delivering a whole lot of things that you don't want and the combination of these different characteristics and So that that sum total ends up being your, your actual capacity or your or your genetic portion of this triad. So your perception, you have intelligence and you have agency. And notice that all the primary flow or the dominant flow is from procession through Daisy. And then of course, it goes into the environment, you do stuff but it causes the environment to change in some way. And then you proceed what happens in your on your loop, which is now both the Boyd ooda loop and the sovereignty loop and the way that I'm describing it now, also there is that it goes the other way that we at least and I think most sentient creatures will have a dispositional attitude. So for example, if you are disposed towards being in a fight and say for example, your regarding perceived that you may be in a fight, your body's not prepared to be in a fight. You're actually feeding back from your action potential into your twist making meaning making all the way down to perception. So you'll actually be potentially more likely to perceive threats and less likely to perceive things that are non threats because your dispositional attitude that the action level is actually feeding back into the circle. So there's there's forward and backwards loops in sovereignty.
Okay, so that's that's the framework at a theoretical level. And so there's a couple of things. One is, we can speak about sovereignty now as almost well not as old as a capacity, which means that there's a continuum, you can have a certain level of sovereignty, it'll have certain qualities. And this will measure your ability to respond to your environment. So I may be sovereign. Now under the conditions that I am in a ninja district sets of things to which I must respond, but I might find myself not sovereign. Something may have come that is outside of my perceptual capacity, or I might have been overwhelmed and have overall capacity created.
The second thing is that we can notice how this concept relates to some of the other things that are going on in the broader world. So, a hypothesis or a heuristic might be that one should always only act in one of two ways, either within the scope of your sovereignty or to upgrade or improve your sovereignty itself. So if you find yourself faced with a potential problem, some tasks some challenge, either you are up to the challenge, your sovereignty is able to respond to what's happening. Or you should actually focus first and foremost on getting your your sovereignty up to the task, which means, for example, that as a heuristic, if you're faced with a challenge that is outside of the scope of your sovereignty, venturing into that challenge, is only a worst case scenario choice. What you should instead do is improve or increase your sovereignty.
So that then you're able to respond to your environment. And then a simple example here might be, say, like a sporting event, if you don't know how to shoot an arrow at all, you're not going to do very well in an archery competition. So then rather than just sort of wildly shooting and missing, the right response is just to upgrade your capacity become more skillful in that particular endeavor.
And we can extend this broadly. So, for example, Jordan Peterson, I would say introducing this medium post is in many ways, just pointing this back out that sovereignty is the place from which you have the ability to be responsible, and you have an obligation to be responsible for what you can be responsible for. But it's actually that foolishness to endeavor to be responsible outside of your ability to respond. So first and foremost, figure out what your sovereignty is. So beginning the middle, the end of the century, beginning with you, you clean your room, if you can't take care of something like that.
Then what makes you think that you are prepared to take care of something even more complex? 
So start with yourself, get yourself sorted out, get yourself in a space of self sovereignty, and building things like your awareness of your capacities and how your capacities are operating now, am I overwhelmed? am I working effectively in my flow around the loop, and then build a learning, quote, rather build the ability to build capacity, then build discernment, which is the relationship between the capacity components in and how to actually notice where you are in relationship to your capacity to learn and your capacity, then finally to respond. And as you have gone through that process, as you've actually mastered sovereignty itself, then you are optimally positioned to go out into the world and do begin to address more broad and me more significant or more, in principle meaningful challenges.
So that's so that's it, that's this particular concept, I will in fact, likely be referring to some some components of this concept in the future. So if it doesn't make sense, it might make be a good idea to take a look at the medium post. Maybe writing is a is something over which you have more sovereignty, it's a bit of a sexual modality. And of course, I've spent more time on it than this video, which I once again have done off the top of my head. By the way, for those of you who've been noting that you'd like to see an improvement in audio quality, and when I had made an investment and bought this Elvis style microphone, so I hope the audio quality is up to standard if it is all going to stand so I don't have to hold it Ellis style, and I may eventually upgrade my recording capacity in general.