Okay, so this is Episode Two of my YouTube experiment. And today what I want to do is I wanted to talk about what I have long thought is, in fact, one of the most important concepts in the contemporary environment and one of the least talked about at least well understood, and this is the distinction between rivalrous goods, rivals, phenomena and anti rivalrous phenomenon. I think this, this concept by itself, if fully grasped, maybe the most important one out there. So on that note, let's start.
So the rivalrous is pretty straightforward.
It consists of things like hamburgers and glasses of water and oil, where if I have it, you don't have it. And if I have consumed it, then it's gone forever. Right. So these are fundamentally fundamentally not shareable and funny. Mentally and tropic kinds of things. And it's I think it's fair to say that most, if not all of our economic structures and to a great extent many of our legal and political structures for, say the past 15,000 years have been about trying to solve the problem of how do we most effectively which sometimes means most equitably, and sometimes that means most productively generate and distribute rivalrous goods, right. I mean, for most of human history, the problem of how do we feed people has been the problem with our contemporary or at least say late 70s, economical political structures being the most effective figured out thus far. 
Now, the the anti rivalrous is very importantly, completely different in time is that side of things where, if I have it, you can also get a completely functional copy of it without me losing it at all. And actually, even more importantly, the more people who have it, the more valuable it becomes. The canonical example here would be something like say, language, or a telecommunications network like the internet. You know, if I'm the only person who speaks Esperanto, it's not worth anything. But if I teach you Esperanto, which has some cost, but the cost of that is is minuscule compared to the cost of creating the language in the first place. 
It gets more violent. Of course, every additional person gets added to the network increases the value of the network exponentially as it is Metcalfe's law, and because of a more fundamental notion of what kinds of things intrinsically participate in Metcalfe's law. Okay, so the first instance Once you have this distinction is to recognize that a lot of the deep concepts that that we apply and use to make good choices in the domain of the rivalrous actually don't work at all in the domain of the anti robbers for deep reasons. So for example, let's take the micro economic concepts of supply and demand the price function in a rival risk domain, where the cost of production is asymptotically related in some fixed way to the value, meaning that even though you can get more and more efficient as a producing a car, the production of a car has some fixed relatively fixed cost.
And as a consequence, there is a point at which it just doesn't make sense to make more cars the incremental marginal value of the new car is less than the incremental marginal value sorry marginal costs. of creating a new car. And this is gonna be characteristic characteristic of all kinds of drivers phenomena, there's just a crossover point where it costs too much to make more in the relationship to the amount of value that you can generate out of it. And, and there seems to be an intrinsic, decreasing returns to scale so that in any given technological framework, you can squeeze a certain amount of efficiency out of your production path, and then you reach an asymptotic limit. Now, of course, we can continually move into new kinds of technological frameworks, and we'll speak about that in a moment. But once you're in one, that's where you're stuck. And in this context, the price function actually ends up being a perfectly efficient way of identifying what is the appropriate combination of where an individual should point their attention, meaning, if I want to figure out what I should do, all I have to do is Look for the places where I can make the most money. 
If the economy says that I make more money being a elementary school teacher or being a coal miner, then that's what I should do, at least within the domains of what microeconomics can accomplish. And also, it serves as the mechanism for motivation of that same behavior. So if I want to buy stuff that I need money, and the way that I get money is by doing the stuff that the economy says, is a value. And so this is orthodox economics, and at least within the domain of the rivalrous it, more or less works, I mean, there's a lot of fuzziness outside of the notion of a perfect economy, but it's still a good good theory, and the price function is effective. Now, the problem is, is that it doesn't work at all in the anti RalpherZ. And this is I think, important, not that it doesn't work a little bit we can kind of clued you to make it work. It's actually the opposite direction. So for example, we have tried to cluded the entire concept of intellectual property the notion of Creating rival ristmas creating scarcity around fundamentally anti rivalries, things like ideas, is our effort to shoehorn the anti rivalries into rivalries, legal, economic, and political frameworks. So how do we tell people how valuable it is to create new ideas? 
Well, if all we've got is supply in a minute, the price function, we have to turn these new ideas into the functional equivalent of a barrel of oil into the functional equivalent of a ham sandwich. There's only so much that can go around. It's scarce and so the price function works. The problem is, since the marginal cost of copying, say something like calculus is effectively de minimis, it's effectively zero. And the marginal value is not just the value that endures to the individual who gets it, right. So there if I don't know calculus has value to me of me learning calculus, but there's also the Metcalfe's law, which is that calculus in general gets more valuable to literally everyone, the more people who have So what that means is that to put a very fine point on it, you should be willing to pay me to learn calculus, at least some amount. And in fact, as a community, we should be collectively willing to pay effectively anyone to learn calculus, because the net net value to the whole to the community is going up exponentially. And the marginal cost of learning it is, in fact, asymptotically. Going down. There's some flat level and there's specific reasons which has to do with the relationship with the rivalrous and the ante Roberts. I guess if you followed me this far, it might be worth diving into that a little bit. I apologize that this is getting a bit convoluted. I don't have enough skills video to edit this. This is all being taken in one splurge. 
So we talked earlier about the notion of the way that you might move from one technical regime to another technical regime. And right now we're focused on what are the actual limits of where the rubber is doesn't reduce to zero copying. cost. And this is just with those two pieces relate. So the anti rivalrous is how we innovate and develop new technical regimes. So when a given rivalrous economy shifts to a new, fundamental capacity, it does so on the basis of some anti Roberts innovation. It's somebody invents, invent the wheel, somebody invented the steam engine, somebody invents electricity, which is an anti rivalrous phenomenon to change the underlying basis upon which the entire rosboroughs economy operates. Right? So that's one side of it. Innovation waves are the anti rivalries getting back on the rivalrous contrary wise, the amount of irreducible energy that is necessary for a copy of the anti rapper is to be written to a an agent is the rivalrous constraining the the effectiveness or the propagation of the interoperate so If it takes a human being, say a year to learn Chinese, then the amount of actual rivalries energy of feeding that individual house and that individual and maintaining the integrity of their intention and the opportunity cost of doing just that is the rivalries substrate against which the anti rivalries is working.
Okay, so now get to the last point. Why is this the crown jewel? Well, you might be able to get the the anti rivalrous is the crown jewel because of this exponential, it is the thing that causes the exponential to show up at all, that once you've developed, once one person has done, the work of developing calculus is almost free for everyone else, which means that the next group of people who are coming don't have to reinvent calculus, they just learn it, and then they get to use it and then they get to innovate and Half of it. So rather than constantly investing most of your energy and merely reproducing a constant state, every iteration of generativity is building on a effectively free existing state. And this, of course, is what generates exponentials. Now, if you take that fat, and you combine it with the recognition that our entire social, economic and legal infrastructure is currently optimized for the rivalrous, you then see the opportunity. If we can figure out how to construct a social framework, which is optimized for the anti rivalrous, you should expect to see a rather dramatic increase in anti rivalrous generation. And of course, when you're on an exponential, any increase is a massive increasing in any shift to the right if you could move like imagine if you were able to teleport your portion of society to 2025 next year, so everybody else's at 19 2019 and you're at 2025 in terms of comparative technological capability.
Well, that's a decisive strategic advantage. I mean, you just have exponentially more capability than people who didn't make that move.
So, and appropriately designed, and to rivalrous civilization toolkit reaches escape velocity, Visa V, the sum total of all rivalrous civilizations. That's it. That's the key idea.