Yes. So I have another one that also came out of the conversation that I had today. And I like to try to get that one shot as well. This speaks to a problematic that has definitely been in the, in the air around the work of Jordan Peterson. And this has to do with this question of responsibility. And so I'd like to get my my take on it. You know that I've talked a lot about sovereignty, and about what it looks like and what it means and how it works. And the proposal that I would make, and I think this is also the perspective that Peterson has, although I haven't talked to him about it in detail. So I don't really know is there's a stack and it's like a passing. 
He says, You've got to clean your room. You got to get yourself sorted out before you can try to fix your relationships with your family and then before you could try to go out and do something in the world. And my proposition is that that's actually more or less True. And I think it's important, which is not to say by any stretch of the imagination that going out and addressing things in your community and going out and addressing things in the larger world is not simultaneously needful in doable. It's just that they actually have to be done in the right in the right order. And here's why I think that's the case. I think it comes down to this notion of how responsibility cashes out and how we can find ourselves subtly failing to be able to take responsibility. So the rule that I would put in place, the proposition that I would make is that you cannot take responsibility for someone else. Until you can actually take full responsibility for yourself. Now, by that I don't mean that you've achieved mastery in self responsibility. I don't mean that your sovereignty as an individual, as Become infinite. What I mean is, at a minimum, you have begun the process of actually being aware of what your own personal sovereignty looks and feels like you've begun the process of actually constructing your own individual sovereignty. 
And you've made the choice to fully take responsibility for yourself. What that means is, you get hit by a bus, you lose all your money in a stock market downturn, your, you know, dog gets hit by lightning, you take responsibility for that. Now, that sounds maybe a little weird, obviously, in some sense, you don't have a causal agency over lightning in stock market phenomena. So what does it mean to take responsibility for that? Well, at a minimum, it means maintaining the integrity of your sovereignty in response to the things the world throws at you. All right, you get that that's the key insight. Once you've taken a choice made a choice to take full responsibility for yourself. What that means is that Not that you can control the world, what it means is that you're able to maintain the integrity of your sovereignty, no matter what the world throws at you. And what that means is that you're able to maintain the capacity to make the least the best choices that you can make, you're showing up the best that you can show up in response to the circumstances that you find yourself in, right. This ends up I think being the key. Quite often, people will go in two distinct bad directions. One Direction is they actually externalize this responsibility. And what they really do is they disempower themselves, right? So if you blame the world, for shitty things that happened to you, what you're doing actually is disempowering yourself. You're weakening yourself. 
It isn't that flat out the reality the world does stuff over which you have no agency that doesn't matter. What you have agency over is how you respond to it. And whether you respond to it. And by externalizing, that agency of externalizing your capacity to choose how you respond, which you fundamentally do own all the way down to existential base. by outsourcing the ability to choose how you respond, then you are no longer able to maintain the integrity of your own sovereignty, which means by definition, you are now no longer able to actually make good choices. Okay, well, shit. Well now, if you're in a circumstance where you're trying to do something awfully difficult, like, enter into relationship with other human beings or modify the conditions of the complex environment which you live, and you're not making as good choices you can make Well, that's a meta bad choice right now you're setting yourself and the world up for bad consequences. So that's one piece then the second piece is even more problematic. You become like, almost an evolution of the first which is not only do you externalize your own agency, right, you blame the world. And again, I need to reinforce, I don't mean, not being aware of the fact that there's shit going on over which you have no control. That's very different. What I mean is blaming the world externalizing your own authority over your own choice making, right? That's the key. So that's Problem number one. Problem number two, is when you go beyond that, and you actually been begin constructing something that can only satisfy itself by operating in that externalized environment. That's tricky. Let me see if I can get make that more clear. 
So there's a mania that happens when you begin that second path, of mania for actually identifying agency as external, and therefore only being able to feel a sense of being agentive by virtue of exercising control over that which is external How's that for a mouthful? That, I think is the key insight? Right? So the idea is that in the first move, you disempower yourself by externalizing, your agency and the second move, you actually identify the outside as the essence of the agency, and your ability to control and influence that as the only mechanism of agency that is available to you. Which, of course, is a radical disempowerment and very difficult to recover from, and it will actually show up as a mania, which is the same thing as an addiction, right? You are you your ability, your your phenomenal schema, is no longer actually responsive to noumenal reality. And you're going to start really feeling anxious, you're going to feel neurotic, you're going to feel agitated. And of course, that is going through those sorts of things are telling you something fundamentally is wrong with the way that you're going about making sense of making choices in the world. But quite often, if you're stuck in that environment, it's actually just going to be degrading your sovereignty. So that's what I think is the essence of that property.