So today I want to return to some of the earlier concepts that I think more basic and foundational, so this should be shorter and hopefully, maybe a little bit easier.
The concept is fitness landscapes. So this is a concept that was originally developed in the context of evolutionary theory. It's very useful, I think that taken to the right level of abstraction, it can actually be used in a wide variety of different domains, certainly in the exploration of say how culture operates. Even things like say business strategy. So the basic frame is to imagine a field like imagine just a flat piece of paper, and then imagine it has a topography of verticality in the Z dimension. So it's going to be characterized by hills and valleys.
And the idea here is that the the position on the x and the y axis more or less represent particular way of being or or a, an organism, organisms strategy.
So a simple example might be, it's a choice between whether it be a brown bunny or a white bunny.
Or say to be a bird, right? These are all just different strategies of being in the environment. And then the shape of the Z dimension represents the sum of all of the feedbacks of your actual environment. That's the conditions to which you find yourself that lead to a particular level of adaptive fitness or a reproductive fitness. And so that is to say that if you have a very high Z, if you're if you're on a high hill, then what you are doing, the way you're going about being in the world is is fit, it will survive and reproduce. And if you have a very low z, and particularly for yourself in a valley had negative Z, that it's not it's not very fit and it will reproduce and over time, those things that are fit will continue to exist and will continue to be able to evolve. And those things that are not, will effectively eventually go extinct, they will become extinguished. This is the basic framework. 
And so for example, if you were to imagine a fitness landscape that represented a forest, and you're just dealing with bunnies we're not gonna do with any other kinds of organisms just yet. You might see that there's gonna be a couple of hiccups. There's one Hill decapolis, like a jackrabbit, there's another hill that maybe has kind of a well more sort of a dark black Bunny and then another hill over here that has a kind of a fat brown bunny like something like that. But the idea is that the combination between all the aspects like the size of the ears, the the habits, to run fast, or to eat more, and of course, in this case, the coloration, or the characteristics that end up defining what the shapes the hills are, and in particular on this landscape, the strategy of being a studio Rutan's small eared all white bunny has a very negative fitness. It's a low, it's a valley. 
And so there aren't any mercy if you if you put a whole bunch of randomly selected bunnies in this environment and allow evolution to occur allow it to run for in time, what will end up happening is that you will have some jackrabbits and some dark black bunnies and some brown bunnies occupying those hills and you will have no white bunnies and now shifted shifted the landscape Lily just keep that population as it is and turn it into a place that is in the Arctic like in the near the North Pole above the north of the Arctic Circle. And of course in this case, being a black bunny or being jack rabbit starts to make you stick out as opposed to blend in. And the more you are becoming a white Bunny, the more likely you are to no longer be identified and hunted. And sort of the department is the entire population is a new hill that has emerged that hills called being a white Bunny and the other hills that used to be hills, like being a dark black bunny or a jackrabbit has have shrunk and in fact, become valleys. And so the population will slowly drift from those locations over onto the hill. So you basically have a couple of simple dynamics, you have the notion of what's the topology, the landscape, where the hills, what are the valleys, and then you have the insight that given time, any evolutionary population will eventually find its way to the highest hills and out of the lowest valleys.
Now, in a moment, I'm gonna get back to the fact that the landscape itself changes because that's very important. But let's ignore that for right now and just kind of look at a specific landscape. Now, one of the deep concepts that comes out of this framework, well, it's actually two concepts. One is hill climbing, and the other is Valley crossing. Right? So in the hill climbing strategy, what one does is one seeks a hill and endeavors to climb in the opposite direction, right? So if I'm saying Sitting in the spot, and I sort of look around me on this landscape. And I noticed that to my right at three o'clock, there's an upgraded into my left at nine o'clock, there's a down gradient, I turned right and start climbing the hill. 
And in the hill climbing strategy, there's a whole bunch of stuff that happens about getting good at climbing hills. So on the one hand, it's a strategy. But the other hand, it's an attitude, it's actually a sort of a meta strategy or capacity to have strategies. And so one can become optimized for hill climbing. Now, if you're on a landscape that is defined by a small number, let's say one really big steep hill, then, you know, when not only becomes a hill climate wonderfulest must in fact become optimized for hill climbing. And an example of that might be what happens when you have an environment next to the great moderation in the west from the 80s until now, in fact, frankly, from World War Two until now, where the condition than the environment were such that they became more and more normalized. And you had sort of a concentration of certain strategies to begin to build on themselves as a whole other issue here, nice construction, which we'll get to at the end. But you effectively have steep hill. So in now, like 2010, say, go to Harvard, go to Harvard Business School, go to Goldman Sachs, become a partner, Goldman Sachs get a private jet and a private island you win. And that is a hill climbing in 20th century, Western civilization parks a lot.
The other strategy is called Valley crossing. So to cross the valley means to in fact, for some period of time to go down and finish you're actually moving from a location say fitness five, down to say a location of fitness minus two, you're going down the hill, not up. And acrossing what may be some significant desert. It's called the adaptive Valley. But what's happening is that as you doing that, you may discover another hill over here, and it may be a higher Hill, right? So this is why you do it digitally, there's no good reason to undergo an adaptive crossing. If there's In fact, nothing else out there. Because it's hard. Most organisms die in the desert or they died during the adaptive crossing. And in particular, if you find yourself optimized for hill climbing, then one, you will tend to not even want to try to engage in adaptive crossing, the simple notion of endeavor to do so will be inhibited. But there's a good reason for that, because you're also not very good at and so you're more likely to die than something which is adapted for Valley crossing.
And of course, the point of Valley crossing is one there may be bigger hills out there.
And to the Hill to draw may be going away because these things change. In fact, they don't just change willy nilly, they often change because of the strategies we're going on. So if there is, say a hill that emerges here, the simple fact that everyone is now trying to climb that hill itself becomes part of the environment that you're in. Right. So no longer for example, you just struggling against nature, you're now struggling against other organisms that are part of that environment that are themselves struggling against nature. And so, in effect, not just an effect in in specifically in the model, the hill actually gets harder to climb, it's a to be adaptive to that hill itself becomes a niche. So this is why what has to become optimized for hill climbing. But what that means is that if you're not able to keep up the pace of being adapted to the Hill, then for you at least, that hill is becoming in fact flatter and flatter. And of course there's the pure nature piece like the watering hole can become dry, the oil can become tapped.
A prey species might go extinct to become department with the conditions can also change the Hill used to be, say a great, awesome adaptive Hill to fade and go away. And so you're normally it is very fit to be able to balance between hill climbing and valley crossing, but in certain circumstances is locally fit. It is sort of the short term best choice to become adaptive, adapted to hill climbing. And of course, in certain circumstances also locally fit to become adapted to Valley crossing.
where we are right now is a place where, because of something called niche construction, we've generated circumstances where Valley crossing has largely been selected against that the native capacity to explore novel spaces and to endure not being very effective in your environment has largely been extinguished or pushed away and anyone who has that as a basic habit has had a rough time of it. Whereas By contrast, the adaptive capacity to find out what already works and just get better at doing that and to optimize for hills that are present has been optimized sports been trained for so our social feedback environment has been doing that. And so this is one of the interesting consequences of deconstruction. And now I'm just about to finish.
In sort of ordinary biological environments, say a beaver is an example of niche construction, where beavers thrive in environments that have certain characteristic water features. And they can build dams to make those water features show up, right, so they can actually turn the environment into something for which they are fit.
And, broadly speaking, this is a good thing. This is like a neat meta adapt patient.
But precisely because you're able to construct your niche to make it something that you yourself are already well adapted to. If you're really good at niche construction, what you end up doing, it should convert your environment into one of these things that are hills, you've literally build a hill and then you climb and then you stay On top of it, and this What this means is that you put yourself in a circumstance where you may in fact be causing yourself to lose your capacity to cross valleys. Right? You're actually extinguishing from your environment, the feedback loops and the signals that indicate and train for Valley crossing capacity because you've actually extinguished Valley crossing, you've been able to make the niche so perfect for you. And in fact, recursively the more good you are at climbing the hill, maybe the more power you have it nice construction, she did just feedback with the just makes hill climbing it and Hill creation, a singular capacity that you've actually generated the conditions of making yourself no longer able to cross valleys. And again, this is more or less my diagnosis a big piece of where we are. This maps to the story of thinking and simulated thinking in important ways. And by the way, it also maps to the story of the teacher curve in important ways and to the complicated versus complex and important ways. These things all kind of line up and are useful lenses looking similar problems.
Now, final point, it seems that it is not necessarily the case that one must engage in this sort of short term deconstruction. It seems that if one has a mindfulness of the story that I'm telling, that one could go about endeavoring to create a niche that actually generated rich nimbleness and fluidity in both Valley crossing and hill climbing in basically training the organism to be meta responsive to what would otherwise be happening in the in the natural environment. And we've seen this happen in anthropology you know, the, the notion for example of rites of passage, and of various crucibles of becoming an adult are many ways, deep intense simulations of Valley crossing.
Being able to endure the adaptive Valley and being able to respond to things on your own, so that you can then bring that into the well being of the community. And these sorts of things show up all the time, in long and during tribe. So it seems like they're obviously useful toolkits. And it's interesting that we don't really have that. And well, it's also interesting that they certainly haven't been fully functional. But the basic idea that we may be in a position to be conscious of the fact that there's a difference between kind of a short term, short term golden age but doomed to collapse form of nice construction, and something else, which uses our capacity to learn and uses our intelligence and our consciousness to do something which puts us not just an alignment with the natural ebb and flow of creative evolution.
But in fact does with a higher level and is meta adaptive actually generates something which is optimized for being adaptive itself. Okay, that's that.