Okay, so today what I want to do is talk about a what I think is actually a very, very deep concept that I learned about in a book called The secret of our success by Joseph Henrik. And I'll put some links to the book down below. And he's actually got a number of very good talks on YouTube. So I'll put a link to a couple of those videos as well. The concept here is the distinction between dominance and prestige and the role that distinction plays in culture and cultural evolution. Okay, so, the idea here begins with the insight that human beings have very few hardwired instincts, unlike most other animals, which are born reasonably will capable of quickly becoming functional human beings, as we know are born pretty helpless and one of the very few instincts that we're able to consistently find that seems to be hardwired, really, as far back because we've been able to look so far even like one or two months. As far as I know, is a very, very interesting and unique characteristic in humans, and that is that, from very early age, human beings are very hard wired to endeavor to identify who they should pay attention to. 
And they do it by figuring out or identify who everybody else is paying attention to, is this idea of social attention allocation. So you can imagine a two month old, even a two month old will be scanning the environment to identify who in that environment is worth paying attention to. And then we'll endeavor to emulate whatever they can grasp of what's going on over there. Particularly started intimidate behaviors, with the expectation or the hope that some of those behaviors might in fact, be the ones that are why they're the subject of social attention and therefore worth any money. So it's a kind of a crude tool for collectively figuring out what the right kinds of things to do. But I guess the point is that so far as we can tell, it seems to be the thing, the key that enabled homosapiens to develop culture. Now, there's a whole bunch of stuff we could do on just that. But what I want to talk about is the the two different kinds of social hierarchies that emerged in this context. 
So the first kind of social hierarchy is relatively commonly discussed these days and relatively well understood. And that is a dominance hierarchy. That's the idea here and all social animals have this particular structure, particularly among males, where the ability to engage in effective use of physical strength allows particularly male to achieve dominance over other males and authority in the social structure to cascades down in some sort of hierarchical element. That's a very coarse brush of the of the concept, but I want to spend a whole lot of time there. As I said, it's not that hard to grasp these days. The important part is the other kinds of hierarchy because, as far as, as we can tell are these as far as I know, based on information that I've been exposed to this particular hierarchical approach is unique among humans and is very distinctly associated with the fact that we are a cultural animal. And Henrik calls this the the prestige hierarchy. 
And so, what happens this the prestige hierarchy is this, this dynamic associate with this hardwired habit, which is those individual members of the group who are most attended to by the other members of the group, therefore, end up on the top of the prestige hierarchy and have a social status that is comparable to not necessarily the same as the comparable to individuals who are at the top of the diamonds hierarchy. So, humans as a tribal obligate pack animal Have two distinct characters that are happening simultaneously and a large part of the complexity of our social environment are based upon that tension. That on the one hand, we are at a deep man million level attuned to dominance displays and dominance hierarchies and trying to figure out where we live in that pecking order. But at the same time, at a human level, we are constantly seeking to find out who we should be paying attention to, and who we should be emulating along the prestige hierarchy. 
Now, notice the distinct ways that one goes about navigating these hierarchies and how the net hierarchies play out. So we just use one example as an example that has to do with the relationship between dominant and non dominant males and high prestige and non hybrid stage males in the two hierarchies. So in a dominance hierarchy, non dominant males really quite distinctly want to go out of their way making the acquaintance with the dominant male, you don't want to get his attempt, you don't want to make eye contact you avoided at all costs, because that will be perceived as a dominance challenge. And then consequently involves some sort of dominance conflict, which by hypothesis here, you'll lose. Now, of course, in that context, there's not a whole lot of learning that can take place, right? It's very difficult to learn from someone if you can't even make eye contact with them through trying to avoid proximity to them. By contrast, in the prestige hierarchy, the whole point is, in fact, connection and communication.
So the low prestige males are consistently seeking who they should be attending to, and then endeavoring to find ways to cultivate an opportunity to be in the proximity of high prestige males. So that they can have an opportunity to emulate whatever it is the cause of them to be high prestige. So if you if a particular male happens to be notably good at chipping hand-axes and that is getting him a lot of attention, then as a young middle you see that it You You are glued to him, and you get nearby him and try to figure out how to how to, to absorb this knowledge and of course, that that enables transfer of knowledge to occur and then transfer of knowledge enables the development and propagation of culture.
But the last person most important part and that is in fact the relationship of the high prestige male to the rest of the prestige hierarchy because if the high prestige male behaves in the same way that the dominant male behaves, it'll break down the dynamic. So, the high prestige male has to allow and in fact, be typically benefit from the lack of conflict and the presence of the other males who are endeavoring to learn or emulate his skills. So the high prestige male far from optimizing for in tuning for dominance, optimizes in tools for teaching, and for skillfully separating those individual males who in fact be to his benefit. To interact with, and to increase his capacity to be successful in meeting resource generation and just staying alive, you know who's good to be on his team. And soon as it happens, that the the skill set of the high prestige male is in what we might call ethical leadership, or in, in teaching, which is a far cry from the skill set of the dominance male. 
And of course, I'm, I'm articulating this all in the male framework. There are various hardcore relationships in the female framework and then mixed mechanisms as well for sure. But the male hierarchies are a bit easier to grasp as a single example. So, so to recap, a human being seemed to be uniquely distinguished in evolution from other primates, from other hominids, from other mammals in that we have been hardwired and very deep way and and singularly for this notion of attention of social attention and emulation. This is related to connected to the emergence of a completely separate social hierarchical framework around prestige, prestige and dominance run simultaneously in homosapiens. And the tension between prestige and dominance is quite significant in understanding the complexity of human social relationships. 
I guess the last note, since I've done this pretty quickly, is to say that if you imagine the kinds of social dynamics that are associated with the effective control of rivalrous resources, you'll notice that dominance is actually a pretty good approach. You know, if what I want to do is control a watering hole. The dominance is Sort of the approach that I want to take. Whereas if the endeavor is to generate anti rivalrous resources, then prestige is the right approach to take. And so, it may be in fact, that this distinction between rivalrous and anti rather risk is directly related to the proposition that I put out there to consider to the distinction between the dominance and the prestige approaches. And that I would go further and propose that is precisely the selection gradient associated with the ability to grasp and advance along the anti ravenous frontier that gave rise to the niche of prestige and that we now are in a cove illusionary dynamic between the prestige gradient or the prestige selection gradient and the ante reverence, right 10 minutes. That's all. I hope it's useful.