Welcome to another super lo-fi edition of deep code. Today, what I want to do is talk about a concept that I've mentioned a few times in my writing, but I don't believe I've mentioned in the videos, and that is supernormal stimuli, and a new idea that I've come up with and how we might actually be able to respond to them. So first, what is the super normal stimulus? To get to the bottom of this idea? I think we just have to take a look at two different things that seemed to show up in our being in the world as evolved organisms. The first is that the world is big, it's complex. It contains all kinds of stuff that we can post, possibly hope to fully track. And we're relatively limited. So what ends up happening is that we have to use some simple model some subset of heuristics and signs and signifiers and rules of thumb, to make sense of what's going on our environment and guide us to make good choices. 
So I'm going to call these things the things we want, right, so we have a set of symbols of stimuli that we perceive in our environment. And of those, we're going to select a few. And we're going to identify those as being attractive or good, and we will seek them out will be willing to take risks in order to engage with them. And then on the other side, we actually have the actual effects of the choices that we make in our adaptive fitness in our environment. So if, for example, we seek out a shiny red apple looking object and we consume it and it's poisonous and we die, then we've received the ultimate feedback from by our environment is a bad choice. So by contrast, if we seek it out and eat it, and it's full of calories, nutrition as a consequence, we survive more effectively than then there's organisms around us that don't do that. Then we will get what I'm going to call what we need. So I'm making the distinction what we want what we need, what we want, is the Set of relatively simple symbols that indicate what we think are in fact have an impact our proxies for what we think we need. And what we need is in fact, the actual complex reality that is adaptive to our environment. So this is the first part, there's a separation of who we want what we need. Then the second part is that any given species will have been involved in within some particular actual niche, which is going to contain some distribution of phenomena. 
So we'll have what is in fact normal. So if you say, spend all of your time in the desert your organism evolved to the desert, then certain ranges of moisture in certain ranges of temperature are normal. And as a consequence, they're going to be different phenomenon that are not normally present in your environment as a certain intensities or certain characteristics. And there's going to be other than our So that's more, that's it, which is the evolution of all of us to be fit, but only within the constraints of the selection pressures. And so if we find ourselves encountering something that is well outside of are different to the selection pressures to which we are adapted, we will not be adapted to it, evolution doesn't just make up lots of redundancy. It's really rather sloppy when it comes to that just just enough, there's kind of a rule of thumb. So, so, these two pieces combined, then give rise to the problem and the possibility of supernormal stimuli. So and So, then think about that what makes this stimulus super normal is that again, two distinctions one is that it takes the the aspects of phenomena that we are in fact sensitive to the the aspects that are that we want, say the shiny red apple Miss of an apple, and it abstracts and distill that into a concentrated intensity but simultaneously It is not necessarily and therefore, for corporate money is not present to and connected to the complexity of the phenomenon that was, in fact, made it what made a need for why we actually were seeking it out adaptively in the first place. 
So you might imagine, for example, a fake Apple, right, it's a very red, very shiny, very Apple ish has been blemishes, it looks like the perfect apple. And if you would have put a child who'd never encountered such a thing up to a table where it had a real apple and it had a sort of super normal fake Apple to show them actually selected the fake apple in spite of the fact that it doesn't, you can't eat it has no nutrition in it. And these experiment, experiments have in fact been done. Famously, for example, with a certain species of bird that sort of dispense with a lot of the nonsense of what it means for mother birds what kind of baby bird and evolution notice that as long as the mother bird is feeding patches of Read that are sort of vaguely circular shape at a certain height and distance, then that turns out to be enough. The mother's want capacity is oriented towards patches of red, it's needful. 
This, of course, is to actually feed its offspring, but that separation is real. And so the mother only really identifies its heuristic is patches of rather than a certain intensity and color. And if an enterprising and of course, this sort of thing is works in the nest, right, we rarely have ever is ever going to encounter a Patrick right of a certain size and location in nature. But if an enterprising young scientist comes along and plants little sticks with patches of red that are more red and more of the right shape than the baby birds, then the mother will in fact actually try to feed the the fake baby bird to the detriment of its own offspring. Right. So this is the this is the point we are even we humans are relatively helpless when it comes to these deeply evolved mechanisms for Trying to connect what we want what we need. And then of course, the real problem that we're encountering somewhat, massively now is that we humans have become extraordinarily capable of giving ourselves what we want, but haven't actually yet reached anywhere near the same capability of being able to ensure a binding in actual reality between what we want and what we need. So don't food for example, cotton candy. 
Here's something where we've been able to abstract the essence of sweetness, which would attach to the context of an apple is associated with something that is, in fact, good for a primate in the forest. But we've abstracted it from that context, we've intensified it in the form of say, cotton candy or Skittles. And we've completely eliminated the nutritional content that made it beautiful in the first place. And in point of fact, actually in in a market environment, where you're actually playing precisely With the limits of a human beings capacity to make sense of the binding between what they want and what they need, meaning, if you give people if you spend the energy spend the money and effort to give people what they need, even if they have no capacity to actually know it, because they don't want it to be what they need, they don't want, you're very unlikely to be rewarded in the marketplace. And of course, you are likely to be punished as a consequence for your product costs more. 
So of course, the marketplace will tend to select for an increasing skillfulness and being able to identify, isolate, and produce supernormal stimuli to produce wants that are are increasingly abstracted and separate from neat and I don't really have to put this in the lap of modern humanity. Huge portions of what makes it culture are supernormal stimuli and music, all forms of storytelling. You know, all forms of fashion and dress and makeup. I mean, frankly, many of our vocal inflections are themselves supernormal stimuli because Because we have this capacity to identify what other people want and what we want, and to generate that in the world. But connecting beyond that, and the belief in the gap between wants and needs is and so far proven to be very difficult. I'm going to just I'll just do storytelling very quickly. So you know, the the heuristic, the the underlying evolved attraction to say, for example, gossip makes sense, because in human society, the well being of the tribe is crucial, right? 
If I as an individual, totally dependent on the wilderness, I tried to my tribe begins to break apart in some way, I'm in deep trouble, right? So it's important for me to always be ever so slightly tuned to how well the tribe is doing and therefore attractive, like I will, in fact, be paying attention when there's some sense that some signal being passed, that there's some kind of breakdown so I can make sense of it and respond to it. But of course, the Reality of human relationships is relatively spare, right? I have had a few quite significant intense experiences in my life. few, if any, are ever going to reach the level that maybe I seen a movie or read about in a book. And they certainly don't occur with the commonness that is available when you turn on the TV and just flip through the channels. And so as a consequence, we have this evolved capacity to be sensitive to drama and to into gossip. But we have a learned ability to produce that output in orders of magnitude in terms of with intensity, and in regularity, that is part of our natural environment. And so of course, we now live in a world where there will be people magazine, and people go and watch, Avengers Age of old Trump. These are just a different way of packaging the notion of supernormal stimuli.
And you know, the key thing here at this level is to recognize that left to its own devices. This is disastrous. That there's a massive breakdown in adaptive capacity when we give what we want without regard to what we need. It's a huge jam. I mean, it's effectively the same thing is taking heroin instead of actually being successful in life or spending all day long clicking on your phone instead of making good decisions, right? You're, you're you're we're addicted, we all addictions. At the end of the day, our addictions to certain neurotransmitters and supernormal stimuli are different phenomenal mechanisms for allowing us to be fully addicted to certain neurotransmitters without regard at all, or at least without much regard to the degree to which those are actually giving us good signs that we're making good choices in our in our lives. And, you know, in the contemporary social environment, the culture that we live in now supernormal stimuli are super saturated, and this is breaking down our individual and collective capacities. So how might we respond to that, and here's where I have something which is very much conjecture, but I think it's very interesting because I suspect we may have actually figured this out, we just did the last thread, I would like to propose for your consideration, that the concept of the sacred and the various other things that are associated with the sacred, like awe, and reverence and humility are actually precisely the right response to supernormal stimuli, in fact, may have been document developed among humans for that reason. So if we think, for example, of alcohol, and you notice that in many traditions, alcohol is is obligated to be bound to some kind of sacred context. So, on some periodic date basis, we get together we drink wine, we get drunk, and when we're outside of that context, it is absolutely prohibited.
This may actually be an awesome way to make use of the fact of supernormal stimuli. On one hand, the ability to do a religious or a profane prohibition of Something really effectively police's, what otherwise might be a very difficult thing to avoid uses social system feedback to help people make the choice not to get addicted to something. And but then on the other hand, the release valve of having access to that in a context which is designed if it's well designed to reinforce needful things. So if we have the sacred ritual where we consume alcohol, and it connects to things like creativity, conviviality connection to that which is greater than ourselves, liminal states, various ways of opening up your shifting and shaping relationships, if you could create that sacred container, and then in that container invested with the attractiveness of supernormal stimuli, and then anything other positive aspects that happened to open up with supernormal, this particular set of supernormal stimuli power, or you've actually invented a very powerful tool for shifting a lot of the negative potential of supernormal into what may be a very powerful binding energy that is deeply needful for the human beings that are there. You it.
And so so maybe that's exactly right. 
You can think about, for example, of that all is what happens when we encounter something which is super normal to our ordinary perceptions, right? So when you encounter something like the Grand Canyon, this is massively more intense and experience then is part of the human involved environment in most people's developmental environments you enter into it. And the part of you that is designed to evaluate the quality of an environment for say, its fitness for habitation is just inadequate to process this Granger and so pow, you're hit, you're super normally overloaded, you feel the sense of all, but we have a notion of a relationship or right relationship to to all notion, for example, the word awful, that one should be very careful in relationship to all your notion of humility, that perhaps one should have a sense of reverence in relationship to those things that have this characteristic. And so perhaps, it took it already was developed that early humans already were running up against the problem supernormal stimuli. And they developed an entire set of practices that were adaptive to this problem, and were able to reposition it in the direction of being adapted for the individuals and societies. So then if that's true, and the question would then be, can we use it? Is that a toolkit that we can make use of can we can we modern rain in our insane, reckless proliferation of supernormal stimuli in all directions? 
And we harness that energy, that capacity and that potential in positive directions by making use of this toolkit of the sacred? Can we, for example, take our storytelling capability and recognize that the stories that we tell are, by definition, sacred and and treat them as such, can we imagine treating something as a banal as the Star Wars trilogy As a sacred text and recognize that the the prequels were, in fact, a profane violation of that sacredness, I think all of us intuitively sense that the second and third matrix movies were a certain kind of deep profanity and a violation. Which is not to say by the way that things like Transformers were the highest form of the sacred to be sure they were already participating in a significant level of profanity. But nonetheless, we can start somewhere and begin the process of just taking that stance and this is very interesting. We don't do this. We very much thrown out the baby with the bathwater with regard to the sacred. And it may even seem cynically obviously foolish maybe infantile or stupid to imagine the notion of a an artist and creator not being able to ruthlessly exploit To all valuable commercial merchandising means the object in their creation, their stories.
And yet, perhaps that is precisely the antidote. And by the way, I'm not piling on storytellers. I just happened to watch the movie Ready Player One recently so it's ready to mind. But the same thing goes for everyone else on the planet who is in the process right now of creating some kind of supernormal stimuli, that we may in fact find ourselves in a contemporary environment, of having to recognize the need fullness of perceiving the sacred everywhere, and therefore becoming very good at things like awe and reverence and humility. Well, perhaps worth consideration.