So today I would like to try to see if we can talk about a interesting concept called discernment. And in particular, how discernment seems to show up in the context of the distinction between broadcast media and decentralized media.
So first, let's start with we'll start with discernment. The concept is a particular way of being able to make subtle distinctions, nuanced distinctions, but clear and with confidence. So in a very prosaic way, you might say that, for example, a person who's become very familiar with and has dealt for a very long time in say, fashion fashion, can quickly and effectively discern the difference between a well made dress and poorly made dress he or she could tell by the feel that the fabric is high quality you could tell by the by the look, the workmanship was quite well done by hypothesis could also tell that the style of construction results well done right. So this is discernment in a particular domain. I, for example, I have developed a certain degree of discern different qualities of coffee. 
I think that is pretty straightforward. And the proposition here is that discernment is a distinct capacity. You might say that using the sovereignty model, it's a bit like a way of very fully proceeding with a very broad and clear set of distinct ways of proceeding. So as you said, your eyes and your ears and with touch and by the way, with your mind And with your cognition, and then integrating these very carefully into a clear sense of what's what. So that's that's discernment. As it seems pretty clear.
This is not a trivial thing to develop, it takes time it takes actual practice in the world. And it takes an ability to really clearly listen to all the ways that you and your body are able to perceive and send signals that were the biggest challenges to discernment is not being able to listen to your own gut, for example, or to my call your intuition. But if you can, if you can really tune into all the different ways that your body in mind, perceive and then allow those to speak clearly and then integrate that into a single signal. You've now developed a certain capacity, capacity of discernment.
Okay, so holding that now let's step to the next concept, the distinction between broadcast media Yeah, and decentralized media.
So in broadcast media, we have an interesting situation, which is, I discussed it in some detail in a medium post called understanding the blue church. But the idea is this you have one speaker, and many, many listeners, because there's an asymmetry in communication. And also, it's more or less one way, meaning that the speaker speaks the signal business speaker to the listeners, and effectively no signal goes from the listeners to the speaker.
And in general, because of this, these characteristics, most specifically a symmetry. There's a relatively small number in the total universe of speakers and a relatively large number of listeners. And so what happens is, is that the kind of the responsibility or the division of labor between speaker and listener shows up with a certain set of requirements, which is to say that your job as a listener, is to listen well to receive that which is being spoken, which is which is being expressed.
And to be able to do something with it, oftentimes to simply be able to repeat it back with fidelity. And so this is sort of the broadcast mode would apply it in say, news or in say school is that that source right you are your job is to hear what the teacher says and then when tested to be able to repeat it back with clarity and that's what we're we're taught in how to deal with broadcast.
And because there's no expectation or notion or intention of being able to have interaction to say signal back, that's more or less it. And so we might say is that in the Cambridge was a video or post, we're both on the distinction between thinking and simulated thinking. Within the broadcast modality, we broadly find ourselves selecting for simulated thinking that our job is to be able to do pattern recognition, to build a schema that maps to whatever was broadcast, be able to recognize when and where a particular piece of some broadcast information is being signaled. And then respond in whatever is the appropriate coded fashion. And I'm willing to know, call that particular style judgment. So judgment is a little bit like the way database works. And so I, I send some signal and the signal x is an indicator of where in the database supposed to look to find the answer. So good judgment operates quickly, it recognizes the pattern correctly, and then accesses the appropriate location to get the right answer and then pulled the right answer correctly. And so that's good judgment in that is it of simulated thinking.
And there's a linkage. It's not obligate, but it's very close. It's very closely related between broadcast as a modality of communication and judgment as a mode of perception.
So then, when I talk about decentralized communication, this is a different characteristic in decentralized communication. There is and there's a rough symmetry between speakers and listeners or expresses and receivers. It may not be fully symmetric, there may know somebody on say, YouTube has more of a parado distribution, or even a power law distribution, but it's not for closed. Case in point this video. A year ago, I was not speaking at all to YouTube, and now I am and so the possibility at least is open for fully symmetric access to this capacity to express the. And as those of you know, who've left comments, the expectation of interactivity is again at least in potential very high and in practices much higher than a broadcast modality. So, in a decentralized medium, you have a roughly symmetric capacity and what is not fully symmetric actuality at least is more in that direction and in broadcast and you also have a an expectation of both a capacity for interaction and some realization of that.
And so then, closed loop that if judgment as a style of perception maps to broadcast, then what I would like to propose is that discernment as a style maps to decentralized media, which is to say that in decentralized media, there are many many.
Listen to many channels, the the number of people on YouTube and their videos on YouTube that I can choose to interact with is enormous, unmanageable. By contrast, Take, for example, the number of TV programs on TV when I was a kid, three, four, if you were tuning into the UHF band, what's just a very different challenge and and so, in order to be able to make sense of a decentralized medium, you need to actually be able to develop discernment. You need to be able to have a better sense of that which furthers and that which is not to make a distinction between a an expression that is frankly worth your time and attention and expression that is not and I'd like in the last me two minutes to double down on that because I suspect and expect that one of the great and powerful possibilities that is arising now is the development of what we might call a discernment engine or collective discernment. And here I want to I want to hold it very lightly, and with some precision, so I'm asking for some discernment.
One of the things that seems to be happening a lot right now is that people who have not yet learned the distinction between thinking and simulated thinking, between judgment and discernment are using judgment in relationship to decentralized expression. And, as a consequence, what happens is they don't listen closely. They don't honor for example, that which is good or clear or helpful in a particular expression, and instead, apply the coarse grained repeat or shut down stuff that happens in judgment and judgment is its crew It has a very small number of boxes it's very much plays into the to cognitive dissonance or confirmation bias. Whereas with discernment does is a sermon listens closely to try to suss out the essence of that which is endeavoring to express itself and then we're possible up regulates it because you have the capacity for interactivity, you have the capacity to point out that which does connect that which sounds like it is, in some sense, true or real deep or honest. And give that more energy get that more attention and this can be again, at the level of said given expression. Like you could choose this video and say this video has a certain sensibility to it that I would like to point people to or I would like to interact with myself. And you can even do to find a great you can say this particular piece of what is being said or spoke speaks to me in a certain way.
And so in collective discernment if we can, if we can figure out a way to how to develop that a hand it off, what ends up happening is there is a gradient. If you recall the video that talked about fitness landscapes, collected discernment creates a hill, it creates a new niche and creates a niche for speaking truthfully, and creates a niche for expressing with honesty and with clarity and with depth in a way that broadcast doesn't broadcast doesn't have a capacity for selecting for those kinds of expressions.
And so, if we are able to and if we choose to enter into a relationship of collective discernment, and if enough of us do and if we use that, the power of interaction the power to choose to express in our own, to identify and up regulate, that which furthers and two point attention away from that wish does not, we should expect that we will begin to see more of that which we we like them and that we want, which we need and less of that which we do not.
And so, we begin to get an interesting sense of how the lead closes here, that the first requirement, or the first step is to become capable of discernment to become capable of noticing, for example, what are the limits of your own sovereignty?
When are you reacting to things? When are you shifting into a judgment perception schema and not listening, but rather simply categorizing and reacting to things that oftentimes were not even yours to begin with?
And when are you listening with discernment and then skillfully adding your insight and your attention, your wisdom, to those things that should be brought more broadly and shared more, fully unconsciously. I think that's all.