Hello everyone!
 Today I am in Manhattan, discussing with my publisher
 - Penguin Random House - my next book.
 I decided to use this occasion to make an announcement,
 which may interest you.
 As some of you may already know, and others will learn now,
 I will participate in a debate with a Marxist philosopher,
 Slavoj Žižek in Toronto on April 19
 at Sony Center.
 Dr. Žižek is a Slovenian philosopher,
 professor at the Institute of Sociology and Philosophy
 at the University of Ljubljana.
 His work in the field of cultural studies,
 psychoanalysis and, most importantly
 for our discussion,
 in the field of Marxism,
 received worldwide recognition.
 Topic -
 happiness, Marxism
 against capitalism.
 Tickets have already sold out.
 So we decided to experiment
 and run the discussion live.
 Naturally, I'll still upload a record of the discussion to YouTube,
 and the soundtrack to the podcast in mid-May,
 as usual.
 But my team and I thought
 that people may be interested in taking
 participate online, live.
 Perhaps there is something appealing and rewarding in attending
 there at the moment when everything happens - even in electronic form.
 Just like there is something positive
 in watching the Olympic sporting event at the time it takes place,
 although it would be more convenient to view it at another time.
 Maybe it has to do with a sense of common,
 social, collective experience.
 Anyway we offer everyone this opportunity
 as an experiment, a study.
 Who knows: maybe one of you will want to organize a party for Žižek?
 You can subscribe to the live stream at
 petersonvszizek.com
 I repeat: petersonvszizek.com
 It will cost you $ 14.95.
 Your money will help us prepare everything professionally,
 as well as hopefully doing so
 to make the broadcast high quality and reliable,
 as well as generate, if successful, profits.
 By the way, Dr. Žižek announced his intention
 donate your share to charity.
 We hope this is a live broadcast
 and the debate itself will interest you.
 Let me remind you what I will be telling in New York
 about the "12 Rules of Life" on April 17th
 at the Beacon Theater and then, on 8 August, in London, at the Apollo Theater.
 All relevant information you will find at
 www.jordanbpeterson.com/events
 Thanks for your attention to this ad,
 as well as for your continued support.
 Goodbye!