Well, I’m speaking today with Dr. StephenHicks, who is a professor of philosophy in
the Department of Philosophy at Rockford Universityin Illinois. Professor Hicks has written a
book—he’s written several books—buthe’s written one in particular that I wanted
to talk to him about today called ExplainingPostmodernism: Skepticism and Socialism from
Rousseau to Foucault, which was publisheda fair while ago now, in 2004, but I think
has become even more pertinent and relevanttoday.
I have talked a lot to my viewers about yourbook, and so let’s talk about Postmodernism
and its relationship with Neo-Marxism. Somaybe you could tell the viewers here a little
more about yourself and how you got interestedin this.
Well, I finished graduate school in philosophyin the early 90s, originally from Canada,
born in Toronto. At that point Pittsburghand Indiana had the two strongest philosophy
of science and logic programs, and that’swhat I was interested in at the time. And
so upon a professor’s recommendation, Iended up at Indiana, and it worked out very
nicely for me.
So most of my graduate work was actually inepistemology, philosophy of science, logic,
some cognitive science issues as well. Soa lot of the epistemological and philosophical/linguistic
issues that come up in Postmodernism—thegroundwork so to speak was laid for that.
When I finished grad school and started teachingfull-time, came to Rockford University. I
was teaching in an honors program, and theway that program worked was—it was essentially
a Great Books program—and so it was likegetting a second education, wonderfully. But
the way it was done was that each course wastaught by two professors to our honor students.
So the professors would be from differentdepartments, so I was paired with literature
professors, history professors, and so on.And this was now the middle of the 90s.
I started to hear about thinkers I had notread. I’d kind-of heard about them, but
now I was reading them more closely and findingthat in history and literature and sociology
and anthropology, names like Derrida and Foucaultand the others, if not omnipresent, were huge
names. So I realized I had a gap in my educationto fill. So I started reading deeply in them.
My education in some ways was broad in thehistory of philosophy but narrow at the graduate
school level and I had focused mostly on Anglo-Americanphilosophy, so my understanding of the Continental
traditions was quite limited. But by the timeI got to the end of the 90s, I realized there
was something significant going on comingout of Continental philosophy. And that’s
where the book [published 2004] came out of.When you say significant, what do you mean
by that? Do you mean intellectually? Do youmean socially? Politically? There’s lots
of different variants of “significant.”Whenyou say significant, what do you mean by that?
Do you mean intellectually? Do you mean socially?Politically? There’s lots of different variants
of “significant.”At that point, “intellectually.” This
was still in the 1990s so postmodernism wasnot yet (outside of, say, art) a cultural
force, but it was strongly an intellectualforce in that. At that point, young Ph.D.s
coming out of sociology, literary criticism,some sub-disciplines in the law (if you’re
getting Ph.D. in the law), historiographyand so on, and certainly in departments in
philosophy still dominated by Continentaltraditional philosophy: almost all of them
are primarily being schooled in what we nowcall postmodern thinkers, so the leading gurus
are people like Derrida, Lyotard, from whomwe get the label post-modern condition, Foucault
and the others.So maybe you could walk us through what you
learned, because people are unfamiliar ... Imean, you were advanced in your education,
including in philosophy, and still recognizedyour ignorance, say, with regards to postmodern
thinking, so that’s obviously a conditionthat is shared by a large number of people.
Postmodernism is one of those words like Existentialismthat covers an awful lot of territory, and
so maybe we could zero in on exactly whatthat means, and who these thinkers were: Derrida,
Foucault, and Lyotard, and what you learnedabout them.
Fair enough. Well, all of the thinkers youjust named—they think broadly, they think
strategically, and they do have a very stronghistorical perspective on their disciplines,
and at the same time they are trying to assesswhere they think we are culturally, politically,
socially—and all of them are making a verydramatic claim: that to some extent or in
some way Modernism has either ended or ithas reached its nadir, or all of the … kind
of the pathologies and negative traits withinthe modern world are reaching a culmination
in their generation, and so it’s time forus to both recognize that Modernism has come
to an end, and that we need some sort of newintellectual framework, a post-modern-like
framework.And the Modernism that they’re criticizing,
how would you characterize that? That’sEnlightenment values? Scientific rationalism?
How would you characterize it, exactly?All of those would be elements of it. But
then of course there are some discipline-specificdifferences: so literature people and philosophy
people and historians will use Modernism slightlydifferently. But the idea at core is that
if you look at the pre-modern world—essentiallythe world of the Middle Ages, say—that that
was itself broken up by a series of revolutions:the Renaissance, Reformation, Counter Reformation,
early scientific revolutions—and all ofthis is going on in historically short chunks
of time: 1500s and 1600s.
And so if you look at both the intellectualworld and the social world, comparing, say,
the 1400s with the 1700s, culturally and intellectuallyyou’re in a different universe at that point.
So the features then of the modern world—nowI’m going to use my philosophical labels
here—are that we are now naturalistic inour thinking. We are no longer primarily supernaturalistic
in our thinking. So we might still be opento the idea that there’s a God or some sort
of supernatural dimension, the way Deistsare, but first and foremost we’re taking
the natural world as a more or less self-contained,self-governing world that operates according
to cause and effect, and we’re going tostudy it in its terms.
We’re not seeing the natural world as derivativeof a “higher” world or that everything
that happens in the natural world is partof “God’s plan” where we read omens
and so forth into everything.
So metaphysically then there’s been a revolution:We’re naturalistic.
Epistemologically—in terms of knowledge—therealso has been a revolution. How do we know
the important truths? How do we acquire thebeliefs that we’re fundamentally going to
commit our lives to? Well, by the time webecome Moderns we take experience seriously,
personal experience. We do that more rigorouslyand we’re developing scientific method (the
way of organizing the data), we’re takinglogic and all the sophisticated tools of rationality
and developing those increasingly ...
And so our opposition then is: Either youknow something because you can experience
it and verify it for yourself, or we've donethe really hard work of scientific method
and as a result of what comes out of that,that’s what we can call knowledge or our
best approximation to that.
And that’s also revolutionary because theprior intellectual framework was much more
intellectually authoritarian in its framework.You would accept in the Catholic tradition
the authority of the Church. And who are youto question the authority of the Church? And
who are you to mouth empirical-rational argumentsagainst the authority of the Church?
Or, you take the authority of Scripture, oryou accept on faith that you've had a mystical
revelation of some sort.
So, in all of those cases you have non-rationalepistemologies that are dominating intellectual
discourse. That is all by and large sweptaway in the modern world.
Okay, so prior to the emergence of the modernworld, we’ll say, people are dominated essentially
by their willingness to adhere to a sharedtradition and that shared tradition is somewhat
tyrannically enforced. But there’s no realalternative in terms of epistemology [epistemology:
the theory of knowledge, especially with regardto its methods, validity and scope: the investigation
of what distinguishes justified belief fromopinion] let’s say. And then as the modern
world emerges, people discover the technologiesof science and the value of rigorously applied
method and the comparison of shared experiencesand that makes us technologically powerful
in a new way and philosophically differentfrom what we were before. ]
Yes, the shared tradition phrase that youadded there, that’s an important one. So
I’d say in the early modern world there’snot necessarily a skepticism about shared
traditions—so there would be an acceptanceof shared traditions—but the idea is that
you would not uncritically accept your tradition.You may accept your tradition, but only after
you've thought it through and made your ownindependent judgment.
Okay, okay, so you’re elevated to the statusof someone who’s capable of taking a stance
with regards to the tradition, and assessingits presuppositions and so forth.
Absolutely.So there’s an elevation of the individual
and the critical intellect along with theelaboration of the scientific method. Okay,
so then we might note, perhaps, that that’sa tremendously effective transformation, although
maybe it leads in a somewhat nihilistic directionmetaphysically—we can leave that to the
side. But it’s a very, very successful revolution,because by the time, at least the beginning
of the 20th century comes along, there’sthis staggering (and of course before that,
the Industrial Revolution), there’s thisstaggering transformation of technology and
technological and conceptual power, and thena stunning increase in the standard of living.
And that starts at about 1890, to really moveexponentially in the 1890s, or at least to
get to the really steep part of the exponentialcurve. Okay, so that seems to be going well.
So what is it that the postmodernists areobjecting to precisely?
Just on those two issues: (1) the metaphysicalnaturalism, and then (2) the elevation of
kind of a critical empiricism and a beliefthat we can, through science—even not necessarily
a science, but social scientists and so on—wecan come to understand powerful general principles
about humanity and social systems.
Those two revolutions both are then subjectedto counter-attacks.
And again, what happens in this case is thereis a revolution. Probably by the time we get
to 1800—the height of the Enlightenment—thereare the beginnings of more powerful skeptical
traditions that come to be developed, so thinkersare starting to say things like: Well, if
scientific method at root is based on theevidence of the senses—we observe the natural
world: that’s our first point of contact—andthen on the basis of that we form abstractions,
and then we put those abstractions into propositions,and then we take those propositions and put
them in networks that we call theories, andso on—so we start to critically examine
each of the elements of scientific method,and over time, weaknesses in the existing
accounts of how all of those “rational operations”work come to be teased out, and philosophy
then starts to go down a more skeptical path.
So if, for example, you take perception asfundamental—it’s you know, the individual
subject’s first point of contact with thenatural world—then you have to immediately
deal with issues of perceptual illusions,or the possibility that people will have hallucinations,
or that the way you report your perceptualexperience is at odds with how I report my
perceptual experience.
Tell me if I’ve got this right. So, withthe dawning of the “Empirical Age,” let’s
say, there’s this idea that you can derivevalid information from sense data—especially
if you contrast that sense data rigorouslywith that of others—okay? So that’s sort
of the foundation for the scientific methodin some sense.
But then—I think this is with Immanuel Kant—there’san objection to that, which is that, Well,
you can’t make the presupposition that thatsense data enters your cognitive apparatus,
your apparatus of understanding, without apriori structuring, and it seems to me that
that’s where the postmodernists really goafter the modernists. It’s that, given that
you have to have a very complex perceptualstructure (that modern people might say was
instantiated as a consequence of biologicalevolution), you can’t make the case that
what you’re receiving from the externalworld is something like “pure information”:
it’s always subject—to some very-difficult-to-delimitdegree—to “interpretation.”
And then you also have to take into accountthe fact of that a priori structure and what
it might mean for your concept of “objectivereality.” And that’s Kant, I think, if
I’ve got that right.
Right. Well, the postmodernists will use bothof those strategies: (1) the anti-empiricist
strategy, and (2) the anti-rationalist strategy.And what’s important about Kant is that
Kant is integrating both of those “anti”strategies. So in the generations before Kant,
the skeptical arguments about perception whichwere directed against the empiricists … the
empiricists want to say that everything isbased on observational data, but then if you
don’t have good answers about hallucinationsand relativity and illusions and so forth,
then it seems like your intellectual structure,whatever it seems to be, if it’s based on
probabilistic or possibly faulty perceptualdata—then the whole thing is a tottering
mess. [Empiricism: the theory stating thatknowledge comes only or primarily from sensory
experience. Empirical research, includingexperiments and validated measurement tools,
guide the scientific method.]
And by the time we get to Kant, the Empiricisttradition is largely unable to respond to
those kinds of objections. And so Kant isrecognizing and saying: All right, we’ve
been trying now for a couple of centuries,we haven’t been able to do so successfully—we’re
not going to be able to do so.
Now, you also nicely emphasized that one ofthe other responses had been on the Rationalist
side, which is to say, “Well, no you don’tstart with pure empirical data—instead we
do have perhaps some innate a priori structuresbuilt into the human mind—how they got there,
maybe they’re put there by God, maybe they’reput there naturalistically or whatever—but
what enables us to have legitimate knowledgeis that our empirical data comes in and it
is filtered and structured by these pre-existingcognitive structures as well.”
Now the problem with that side of the line—andthis is also well worked out by the time you
get to the Kantians—is to say: Well, ifyou’re starting with in-built cognitive
structures, and everything that comes in,so to speak, goes through this structuring
machine and you’re aware of the outputs—becausethat’s what is presented to your mind—well
how do you know those in-built structureshave anything to do with the way reality actually
is out there?
It seems like then what you are stuck withis the end result of a subjective processing,
and there is no way for you, so to speak,to “jump outside of your head” to compare
the end result with the way the world actuallyis, independently of how your mind has structured
the awareness.
So once again, you’re stuck in a rathersubjective place.
And again, the importance of Kant here isthen he’s also looking at this more Rationalist
tradition and he’s saying, Well look, againwe’ve been trying now for a couple of centuries
to work these things out from Descartes toSpinoza, Leibniz and the others, and Rationalism
also has reached a dead end, so we’re notgoing to be able to do so.
So Kant is, in effect, standing at the endof these two traditions and saying, “You
know, the skeptics have it right on both sides:both the Empiricist and the Rationalist traditions
fail. There is no way for us to objectivelycome to know an external reality. We’re
stuck in some sort of deep subjectivism.”
Okay, so I don’t know now whether to talka little bit about the American Pragmatic
approach to that, or whether to ... Maybewe should go ahead and continue our discussion
of the postmodernists, because they’re developingthese claims.
Absolutely, and some of the postmodernistsdo describe themselves as Neo-Pragmatists,
like Richard Rorty for example. So yes, that’sexactly a direction that’s worth going.
Okay, okay. So my understanding of that, ifI was going to defend the Modernist tradition,
let’s say, I would say that we have instantiatedwithin us an a priori perceptual structure
that’s a consequence of millions—billionsof years for that matter—of biological evolution,
and it has emerged in tandem with continualcorrection of its presuppositions by the selection
process. But it’s still subject to errorbecause we have a very limited viewpoint as
specific individuals, and not only are welimited, but we can also make, you might say,
moral errors, and I’ll get back to that,that cloud our judgment.
And so, in an attempt to “expand our purview”and rectify those errors, we do two things:
(1) We test our hypothesis practically againstthe world, which is to say, we say, “Here’s
a theory of reality.” We act it out. Ifthe theory of reality is sufficiently correct,
when we act it out, we get what we want, andthen that’s sufficient proof for the validity
of the theory. It’s not absolute proof,but it’s sufficient proof. And then the
other thing we do (and I think this has beenpaid attention to much less except by thinkers
such as Piaget) is that: (2) We further constrainour presuppositions about reality with the
necessity of constructing theories that arealso acceptable to the people around us.
So they have to be integrate-able within thecurrently existing social contract, and they
have to be functionally appropriate in theexternal world.
And that’s a nice set of constraints, andit seems to me that that, at least in some
part, goes a long ways to answering the objectionsto the limits of the scientific method that
have been discussed historically, and whichyou just summarized.
All right, I’m sympathetic to much of whatyou just went through. In fact a five-point
response to the kinds of arguments that havebeen laid out, where you’re actually putting
me in the position then of defending the postmoderntradition about how it would undercut each
of those components.
So, if you take for example evolutionary epistemology[epistemology: investigation into the origin,
nature, methods and limits of human knowledge],and you gave a nice sketch of one standard
evolutionary epistemological frame in whichyou say: Maybe we have in-built a priori structures,
but we can rely upon them because here weare standing at the long end of hundreds of
thousands or millions of years of evolution,and they would not have survived or enabled
us to survive had they not served some sortof reliable cognitive role in accurately representing
the way the world works.
This is actually too early for the postmoderns,although the postmoderns will agree with this.
This is to say that all of that kind of begsthe question in a very deep way against the
kind of skeptical objections that we’reraising. Because in order to make that paragraph-long
description of what evolutionary epistemologyis, what I have to do is take for granted
basic assumptions, certain truths about theworld: that, for example, there is an external
world; that we are biological creatures; thatwe have in-built structures; that those structures
are evolutionarily responsive and conditionedby changing forces; and so forth.
And if you take those assumptions to be true,then as a consequence or as a conclusion,
you can infer that therefore the intellectualproducts that come out of our cognitive processing
are reliable.
But where did you get those four premisesfrom? How do you know that there is an external
world? How do you know that we are biologicalcreatures? How do you know that evolution
is true, with all of the historical knowledgethat’s necessary to reach the conclusion
that evolution is true? All of that presupposesthat we have legitimate cognitive methods
to come to understand the world. But our havinglegitimate cognitive processes to understand
the world—that’s exactly what we are arguingabout in the first place, and you can’t
just assume that, for then the sake of comingup with some premises that are then in turn
going to validate those cognitive processes.
So something like that they will say is abig circle or a circular-reasoning problem
that evolutionary epistemology finds itselftrapped in.
Now I think that there are some responsesto that, and this is just the first “back
and forth” on that particular debate. Butthat is the kind of response that would be
there.
The third and fourth response (if I’m keepingtrack accurately) is to say that we also have
constraints with respect to ourselves: thatif we have a certain set of hypotheses or
a certain set of theories and we’re testingthem out, we will accept those that give us
“what we want,” what I want, so to speak.
And I’m also necessarily in a social situationso what I need to do is check my results against
the results of others: peer review, experimentreplication and so forth.
[smiles] ... ability to live in the same household...
[laughs] Yes, absolutely, right? More prosaically,“sharing our frameworks with others,”
right? And so on...
And so if, so to speak—and this is the morePragmatist orientation—if we then say we
have a theory or a set of principles or guidelinesor whatever, and they do enable me successfully
to navigate the world to get what I want,or they do enable me to navigate my social
world to get us what we want—then they’rereliable, true, or some sort of “success”
label, epistemologically, that we’re goingto give to them.
Okay, so let me ask you a question about that.This is a place where I got augured in very
badly with Sam Harris when we were discussingmetaphysical presumptions. So you know—and
I’m confused about this I would say to somedegree conceptually because I’m a scientist
and certainly operate most of the time underthe presupposition of an “independent objective
world”—but then I also have some difficultywith the idea that it’s objective truth
within which all other truths are “nested.”And that’s something that Sam and the people
that he represents in some sense are verydead set on insisting.
Now it seems to me though that the crux ofthe matter is something like “the method
of proof.” And this strikes me as very importantbecause, “My theory is correct enough if,
when I implement it, I get what I want”is not the same as the claim “My theory
is true because it’s in accordance withsome independently existing objective world.”
I mean, both of those things could exist atthe same time, but I think the more appropriate
claim to make with regards to human knowledgeis something like its “biological functionality,”
which is that your knowledge is of sufficientaccuracy (which is about the best you can
hope for because of your fundamental ignorance)if, when you implement it, it reliably produces
the results that are commensurate, say, withyour continued existence.
Now it seems to me that that’s a reasonableclaim from a Darwinian perspective [Charles
Darwin, 1809-1882] and it also seems to methat it’s very much in keeping with the
claims of the American Pragmatists. And Imean, it’s not like they were radical postmodernists
...
Right...
...because they weren’t. But they were tryingto solve this problem to some degree of our
fundamental ignorance and our inability tobe certain about the nature of the reality
that surrounds us.
Yes, okay. Let’s set aside Sam Harris’sversion of this and focus on the Pragmatist
tradition here. So, no, you’re absolutelyright.
The Pragmatists, William James [1842-1910],John Dewey [1859-1952], and the others, late
1800s, early 1900s; they are coming a centuryafter the Kantian revolution [Immanuel Kant,
1724-1804], after Hegelianism [G. W. F. Hegel,1770-1831], and so forth—and so they are
very much trying to solve this problem. Oneway—and this is kind of a very American
way—is like: Look, maybe the problem withphilosophy is that we have been too intellectualizing
of cognition, that we’re not just disembodiedbrains or disembodied minds that are trying
to contemplate abstract truths in some otherrealm. Maybe what we need to do is understand
the mind and cognition as a naturalistic processand that the purpose of knowledge is not to
come up with these pure and beautiful Truthsthat are going to be kind of museum pieces
that we will admire, but rather the purposeof knowledge is functional. The purpose of
knowledge is to guide action. And so theywill then hearken back to the earlier Baconian
tradition that knowledge is not an end initself. As Bacon put it, Francis Bacon [1561-1626]:
Knowledge is power, and by its fruits, soto speak, is how you know its worth.
Right.
And so what we then should do is to see thatthe test of truth is not whether it meets
purely intellectual standards of logic andmathematics, but rather, when we put it into
practice, when we act upon it, we actuallyget good results, or we want the results we
want, or I get the results I want. And itcan come in more individualistic form or more
socialized form.
Right, because then we can get on with things,too. Like, despite our ignorance, in some
sense.
So there are two things which are being packagedhere, right? One is to say that knowledge
is functional. And that part I think is importantand I think it’s a very nice correction
by the Pragmatists. It’s not original withthem but they are reemphasizing it in the
19th century. Knowledge needs to be put tothe test and its ability to enable us to be
pragmatic in the real world, is its test.
[28:59] There’s a coda to that as well.And I think this is relevant to Thomas Kuhn’s
[1922-1996] discussion of scientific revolutions,because Kuhn is often read as positing a sequence
of, in some sense, discontinuous revolutions,and that the conceptual structure that characterized
one “epoch,” let’s say—like the Medievalepoch—was so totally different in its presuppositions
from the conceptions that characterized thenext epoch … that you can't even mediate
between them in some sense.
Now the reason I’m bringing this up is becauseKuhn is at least read as hypothesizing that
there’s not any necessary “progress”when you make leaps from one conceptual system
to another. But if you take this pragmaticapproach—the one that we've been outlining—it
seems to me that you can say, Well, it’ssomething like this: Your conceptions of the
world are more tool-like than objective-truth-like,and tools can have a greater or lesser range
of convenience. And so if you come up witha really good tool—which would also be something
that would look objectively true, generallyspeaking—then that’s something that you
can use in almost every situation and it willnever fail you. And I would think of something
like Newtonian physics in that regard, oreven more particularly, quantum mechanics,
because it’s never failed us.
And so it seems to me the Pragmatic approachin some sense allows you to have your cake
and eat it too. You can posit a hierarchyof truths, moving towards absolute truth even,
but also retain your belief in your own ignoranceand not have to beat the drum too hard about
the “eternal accuracy” of your objectivepresuppositions.
Okay. Again I’m sympathetic I think withabout 80 percent of that. But let me put my
skeptical hat back on and say how the postmodernistsor the critics of Pragmatism—critics really
of first-generation Pragmatism—will respondto that. So if we then say: All of these cognitive
results … I’m going to rephrase that.
Okay.
So if we’re going to assess all of our cognitiveresults or cognitive hypotheses in terms of
their workability, or their “getting whatI want” or “what we want,” well then
the big question we have to turn to is tosay, How do we judge whether something works?
Yes.
Or how do I say that, “It’s good becauseI get what I want” or “We get what we
want.” Well, what is a “want”? And wheredid these “wants” come from? And why should
we accept “wants” and “desires” and“achieving certain goals” as our bottom
line, so to speak?
Right, okay. That’s right. So you can startto question the framework, the validity of
the framework within which you’re constructingthe answer.
That’s right. And at this point we’rereading epistemology [epistemology: the theory
of knowledge, especially with regard to itsmethods, validity and scope: the investigation
of what distinguishes justified belief fromopinion] “neutrally” so to speak; and
moving into normative issues, then the wholestatus of normative goals—ends and the means
that are going to enable us to reach thoseends—comes into play.
So if I want to say, “The most importantthing is that I”—I’ll put it very baldly
here—“I get what I want,” right? AndI’m going to assess intellectual structures
and beliefs and hypotheses in terms of, “Dothey give me what I want?” Well, that sounds
already sounds like a fairly normatively subjectivisticstandpoint. Like, why should you take your
“wants” as having some sort of high statusthat everything has to be evaluated in terms
of?
Uh huh.
And then philosophically we say: Where do“wants” come from? And of course there’s
a long anthropological and psychological setof literature here. What’s the source of
our “wants”? Are they based in biologicaldrives? Are they instinctual? Are they acquired?
Are they intellectual? Do they have any relationshipto our rational capacities? When I'm acting,
should I act on my desires and my wants, andso forth?
So there’s that whole tradition, and wehave to have a sophisticated theory about
how all of that is going to work if we’regoing to say we’ll solve all of these cognitive
epistemological issues in terms of “wants”or the satisfaction of “desires” or the
“achievement of goals” the way pragmatistswant us to do.
And again, it’s fairly easy to imagine whatthe skeptical argument is likely going to
be. If it’s a matter of what I want—well,isn’t science supposed to be about coming
up with general truths or maybe even universaltruths?
Okay …
And if it’s immediately going to devolveinto whatever individuals want, well then
we’re going to go in fairly scattered directions.
Okay, so that also opens up a good point fora segue into the potential link between Neo-Marxism,
let’s say, and Postmodernism.
Sure.
Because maybe you could say: Once you've openedthe door to an admission that you can criticize
the idea of “want” as a social construct,let’s say—which is one of the things that
you intimated (not the only thing, obviously)—thenyou open the door to also making the claim
that that social construct that governs the“wants,” that governs the “truth,”
can be governed by “power relationships,”something like that, and then by “unfair
power relationships.”
Exactly.
So you can spin off down that aisle.
And that’s the other thing I really wantto talk to you about, because on the one hand
the postmodernists are following this intellectualtradition of the critique of Western thinking,
which is exactly in some sense what philosophyshould be doing. But in another way, they
seem simultaneously to be introducing, almostby sleight of hand, a kind of social critique
that has its origin more in political revolutionand class-based theory, and they do that under
the guise of pure philosophy, in some sense,but with the intent and motivation of something
like justifying the social revolution, orcontinuing the Marxist analysis of power differential.
It can go both ways, yes. Right? It is possibleto follow the road that we’ve just been
going down, to say, Well, you know, if it’sa matter about ‘what works for you,’ then
that immediately starts to sound too relativisticand subjectivistic and we don’t have an
answer to all the weirdos who want to do strangethings—because that’s what they want to
do—so we might introduce as a correctivea socializing of the process.
Right.
So we might then say, No, it’s not so muchwhat you want as an individual, but rather
what we want, and we have to achieve somesort of a consensus here.
So that’s a slightly cartoon version, butthe difference between William James, who
was more individualistic, and John Dewey inthe next generation who collectivized things
a bit more. So then we have a corrective onall of the individual weirdos—who knows
what their desires and goals are going tobe?
Right.
But anyway, of course we just confront thesame problem there, as soon as we start doing
anthropology, because then if we say: Well,if we relativize it to the social group, when
we start looking at different social groups,obviously different social groups have dramatically
different wants and needs and desires, andthey’ve evolved very different traditions.
And if it’s a matter of saying “What’strue is what works for the group,” there
is then no über group or highest group ofall groups that has status over all of the
others.
And if you do—and this is the second pointthat you said exactly right—then you’re
saying, Well, no, no, this group’s normsand its goals are better than that group’s
goals or norms …
Right.
… and so then you’re into what the criticsare going to call “imperialism” of the
inappropriate form …
Right, and so that leaves us with our currentpolitical situation in some sense, because
that idea has been taken to … that’s alogical conclusion, and that logical conclusion
has now been instantiated to a large degreeas an intellectual and political activist
movement, I would say.
Right, sure, absolutely. So it can start asan intellectual movement and what we’re
trying to do is some hard-core epistemology[epistemology: the theory of knowledge, especially
with regard to its methods, validity and scope:the investigation of what distinguishes justified
belief from opinion] and we go the Empiricistsand the Rationalists and the Kantian revolution
and the Pragmatists, right? And now we’rein the second-generation Pragmatism where
we relativize into various cognitive groupsand then we’re just stuck in a kind of group
relativism, and in the operational principlessocially then is going to be that each group
so to speak should stick to itself and notthink that it can impose its ideas and its
norms on any other group, right? All groups,so to speak, are equal.
Yeah, well, at least they have an equal claimto their formulation of the truth. The problem
with the postmodern conjunction with Neo-Marxismto me seems to be the acceptance of the idea
that there’s an intrinsic moral claim bythe “dispossessed” to the obtaining of
status, and that actually constitutes a highermoral calling in and of itself! So they’re
swallowing a moral claim in making it “universal”in some sense at the same time they criticize
the idea of, say, “general narratives”or “universal moral claims.”
Okay, now that’s also right. That’s theother way to say that. Rather than starting
with epistemology and getting to a kind ofcultural relativism, you can start, of course,
committed to a certain normative [normative:implying, creating, or prescribing a norm
or standard] framework or a certain ideologicalframework (as Marxism is) where you’re very
critical of one of those traditions, and thenthe cultural relativism can be a part of that,
that you use, to criticize the tradition “internally”so to speak. Now then we’re explicitly into—not
kind of “meta-ethics” and asking wheredo we get our ethical principles off the ground—but
where do they come from in the first place,but kind of a robust “normative” ethics
where people have commitments to fairly strongethical principles and ethical ideals.
This is where the debate between, say, Nietzscheand Marx becomes relevant. This is a late
19th century debate. So suppose we say, asboth the Marxists do and the Nietzscheans
do, let’s say: There is no “Truth” inany objective sense. All we have is subjectivity
and relativity of various sorts, and we havedifferent individuals and different groups,
and they are in antagonistic conflict relationswith each other, and that means there’s
not really going to be any rational and civilresolution [40:04] of these discussions with
each other; instead, it all comes down topower.
Yeah, and that’s the strange sleight ofhand claim there too, because why it has to
come down to power? Again that seems to introducethe idea of “necessary need” ….
Okay, okay, yes, all right. That’s anotherthing. Let’s set that aside just for a moment.
Yep, okay.
So then we say: Okay, so we have power. Andone thing that we can say is: While we don’t
think any one individual, or any one group,has a better objective claim to truth or better
ideals, it is nonetheless the case that someindividuals and groups have more power than
others, and so then we have to make our allegianceclear in this unequal power struggle: Are
we on the side of those who have more poweror are we on the side of those who have less
power?
And that’s where when we get then a Nietzscheanand a Marxian “fork in the road.” So the
Nietzscheans, following Nietzsche, will say:Look, it’s all about power. We can try on
some crude evolutionary thinking here: It’sonly by the exercise of power by the stronger,
the fitter, the healthier, and so forth, whoare willing to impose their power on the weaker
and use them for their own ends, that we asindividuals and groups are going to make any
sort of progress toward the next best thing,whatever that is. So in the power struggle
there is no objective morality, no objectivetruth. We just throw our lot in with the stronger,
with the richer, with the more powerful, andsay: Whatever it is that they do to advance
themselves, that’s the normative best thatwe can do. And of course there’s a long
kind of aristocratic tradition in normativethinking that one can draw on to support that.
And then the Marxists of course are just onthe other side of that equation, where their
sympathies initially are going to be to say,in any power struggle: “Our a priori commitments
should always be to the weaker, to those onthe losing end of history, those who suffer,”
and so forth, and it’s always the bad, richand powerful people who are oppressing and
harming them. And so we throw our lot in withthe weaker and we’re willing to use power,
whatever amount of power we have, on behalfof the weaker.
Right.
And then we’re just into what I think ofas the major false alternative that really
has driven much of 20th century intellectuallife: Are you a Nietzschean or are you a Marxist?
Right, right. Well okay. So now we can getto the crux of the matter here to some degree,
because to even engage in that argument meansto accept the a priori position, which you’ve
made quite rationally compelling, let’ssay, that “It’s power. It’s power. Because
there’s no other way of differentiatingbetween the claims of different groups, it’s
power that’s the determining issue.”
Yes.
But that’s something that I really havea problem with. And I think it’s of crucial
importance. Because first of all I think there’sa big difference between power and authority
and competence. Those are all not the samething, because you might be willing to cede
greater status to me in some domains if thereare things I can do, that you value, that
you can’t do. And that’s not power exactly.Power seems to be more that I’m willing
to use force to impose my interpretation ofthe world to get my wants fulfilled on you,
and it seems to me that where the Marxistsmake a huge mistake—not that the Nietzscheans
aren’t making mistakes as well—but wherethe Marxists make a huge mistake is that they
fail to properly differentiate between hierarchiesof interpretation that are predicated on tyrannical
power, and hierarchies of interpretation thatare predicated on authority, competence, and
mutual consent.
The other issue that they fail to contendwith—and I believe this is a form of willful
blindness—is that it isn’t obviously thecase that “every society is set up equally
to only fulfil the desires of the people whoare, in principle, situated at the pinnacles
of the hierarchies.” I actually don’tthink that that’s fundamentally characteristic
of the Western tradition, because it has avery strong emphasis—weirdly enough, and
this is how I think it “extracts” itselfout of the conundrum which accepting a socialized
version of truth presents to you: The Westdoes two things: (1) It says, We have a social
contract that constrains our views of theworld and our actions in it, but (2) that
contract is also simultaneously subordinateto the idea of the sovereignty of each individual.
And so the social contract then is bound toserve the needs of each individual—not any
privileged set of individuals, although sometimesit works out that way—and I don’t believe
that the postmodernists have contended withthat properly, with their criticism of “logocentrism”
for example, which was something that characterizedDerrida.
‘Cause I think that that … ‘cause I… It doesn’t … it never has seemed to
me that what you had with Stalinist Russiaand the Marxist view of the world, and what
you had on the side of the West, was merelya matter of a difference of opinion between
two equally valid socialized modes of interpretingthe world, you know? There’s something wrong
about … There’s something more to theview of the West than what’s embodied in
the conflict between, say, capitalism andsocialism. Because it could have just been
a matter of argumentation and opinion, butI think that that’s faulty.
I thought this way in part because of Piaget[Jean Piaget, 1896-1980], you know, because
Piaget was interested in what the intrinsicconstraints were on a social contract, and
he said … and he was trying to address thisissue of the insufficiency of want as a tool
to justify your claims to truth. That’swhen he introduced the idea of the equilibrated
state. So, if you’re sophisticated, youhave to put forward your want and then meet
it in a way that will meet it today, and tomorrow,and next month, and next year, and in a decade—so
you have to iterate yourself across time,and you have to take all of the iterations
of yourself across time with some degree ofseriousness, and then you also have to do
the same thing as you extend yourself outinto the social community. So it has to be
“what’s good for me now” and repetitivelyinto the future in a manner that’s simultaneously
good for you now and simultaneously into thefuture.
Uh huh.
And that starts to become … and he thoughtabout that as “the playable game,” something
like that. The “voluntarily playable game.”And there’s something deep about that, because
it includes the idea of iteration, you know,iterated interpretations into the equation,
which strikes me as of crucial importance.
Okay, yes, right? Again, I count about sixvery interesting sub-topics built into that,
and the latter part is a very nice statementI think of a kind of Enlightenment humanism
where we’re going to take power seriously,but we’re going to constrain power in a
way that respects the individual and simultaneouslyenables individuals to form mutually beneficial
social networks across time, and so on.
And I’m very sympathetic to that overallconstruction. And that comes out of then the
first part which is a taxonomy [taxonomy:the science or technique of classification]
you’re offering about the nature of power—andthat taxonomy does differ significantly from
both the Marxist and the Nietzschean ones.
Now what I’d say is that I think it’sbetter to take power more neutrally so there’s
a continuity with what the physicists do.And my understanding there is that power is
just the ability to get work done.
Uh hmm.
So you can put that in tool and functionalitylanguage: Power is what gets you from A to
B.
Right, right. Which is also … I love thatdescription, because it fits very nicely in
with the narrative conceptualization of being,because narratives seem to be descriptions
of something like “How to get from pointA to point B.”
Right. But it also doesn’t say anythingabout B and the status of B: How we choose
where we should be going, what our ends are,or what our goals are—so in that sense power
is normatively neutral—it’s a means toan end, and that means when we try to evaluate
the uses of power, we’re going to be evaluatingpower in terms of the ends toward which it
is put, if I can end with that prepositionthere.
So now … Then we say: Okay, well, powercomes in all kinds of forms. I’m quite happy
to say that there’s intellectual power:that’s the ability to use our minds to address
and solve certain problems. There’s muscularpower: the ability to move physical objects.
There’s social power: people respect youand are willing to spend time with you and
divert resources to you voluntarily, and soforth. There’s military power; political
power—and so we can have a whole set ofsubspecies of power. And what they all have
then in common is in each of those domainsthere are goals, and having the power enables
you to achieve your goals in those domains.
Right, and we shouldn’t fall prey to theillusion that there’s necessarily any—like,
what would you call it—“unifying matrix”that makes all those different forms of power
importantly similar except for the terminology,you know? I mean—and this is another thing
that bothers me about both the Nietzscheanand the Marxist view, is that there’s this
proclivity to collapse these multiple modesof power into power itself, and that’s not
reasonable because it’s reasonable to notethat many of the forms of power that you just
described contend against one another, ratherthan mutually fortify one another. It’s
like the balance of power in a polity likethe American polity.
Yes, I think that’s a deep point that you’remaking, and I think that both the Marxists
and the Nietzscheans do end up collapsingpower into a unitary type, and that’s a
mistake. But it’s a mistake only if youdeny, as both the Marxists and the Nietzscheans
do, that there is a deep individuality aboutthe world. So if you think, by contrast, about
the kind of individual human-rights-respectingEnlightenment vision that you’re articulating,
and that I agree with as well: normativelythat wants to devolve social power to the
individual, and leave individuals with a greatdeal of self-responsibility and control over
their own domain so to speak. And the ideathen is that if we’re going to form social
relationships, or any sort of social interaction,it has to be mutually respecting: that I have
to respect your control over your domain andyou respect my control over my domain, but
we agree to share domains, so to speak, voluntarilyto a certain point.
It also means—and this is a place whereI think the postmodernists are really open
to, you might say, conceptual assault—isthat you know, in order to have that freedom
devolve upon the individual in that manner,it also means that the individual has to take
responsibility …
Right.
… for acting as a locus of power in theworld, actual responsibility, and cannot conceive
of themselves or act in a manner that onlymakes them an avatar of a social movement.
And I think that part of the perfervid anti-individualismof the radical Left is precisely predicated
on that refusal to take responsibility, andI think that’s also reflected in the fact
that, by temperament, they’re low in “traitconscientiousness,” so it’s deep, it’s
not merely an opinion; it’s an expressionof something that’s even deeper than opinion.
Okay, yes, that phrase “locus of responsibility,”“locus of power,” “locus of control”—you’re
right that the far Left in Marxist and Neo-Marxistform does deny that, but you also find that
in the far Right …
Yes, you find that among ideologues in general.
Right. So this is a bit of cartoon intellectualhistory, but then if you try to trace it to
the Marxists on the Left and the Nietzscheanson the Right, both of them do deny that individuals
are loci of responsibility. Both of them intheir views of human nature have strongly
deterministic views. What we can an “individual,”according to both of them, is just a “vehicle”
through which “outside forces are flowing,”so to speak. [Determinism: the doctrine that
all events, including human action, are ultimatelydetermined by causes external to the will.
Some philosophers have taken determinism toimply that human beings have no free will
and cannot be held morally responsible fortheir actions.]
Right. Well, you can also see that in somesense as a perverse consequence of the scientific
revolution …
Yes.
…because you still see this among modernscientists: It’s like, “Okay, what are
the causal forces that regulate human behavior?Okay, there’s two primary sources: Nature/biology
and culture.”
So it’s the crude “Nature vs. Nurture”debate being played out through them, yes.
Right! And so in my opinion—and I’ve derivedthis conclusion from studying mythology, mostly—there’s
a missing third element there which is whateverit is that constitutes the active force of
individual consciousness. And we don’t havea good conceptual schema for that.
Right, self-responsibility and being an independentinitiator of power instead of merely a responder
to other power forces, or a vehicle throughwhich those other power forces operate.
Right.
So yes, the individualism that is built intoEnlightenment humanism—you start to see
it developing in Renaissance humanism—isto take seriously the notion that individuals
have some significant measure of control overtheir thoughts, over their actions, to shape
their own character …
Right!
… to shape their own destinies, and thatthat is fundamental to one’s moral dignity
as a human being. And so that view of humannature is built into the ethics fundamentally,
and then all of social relationships haveto be respectful of that individuality, and
then, consequently, when we start to turnto political theory and we talk about very
heavy-duty uses of power, such as the policeand the military—we want to have serious
constraints on government power to make surethat we are respecting individual sovereignty.
Okay. And here’s something perverse, too,that emerges as a consequence of something
you pointed out earlier in the conversation,you know. You mentioned that when Modernism
emerged out of Medievalism, that two thingshappened. One was the elaboration of the conceptual
frames that enabled us to deal with the externalworld. But the other was the elevation of
the individual to the status of valid critic,predicated on the idea that there was something
actually valid about individual experienceas such.
Now the problem there, as far as I can tell—andmaybe this is part of the reason we’re in
this conundrum—is that the elaboration ofthe objective scientific viewpoint left us
with the idea that it was either “nature”or “nurture” that was the source of human
motive power.
But the missing element there is: Well, ifthat’s the case, then why grant to the individual
to begin with the role of independent socialcritic?
Exactly.
Like, on what grounds do you … It’s likea residual belief in something like the autonomy
of the soul, which you can’t just sneakin and not justify, without problems! Like
the ones that we have now!
Yes. Now that’s well put. And I think it’sfair to say that we still are in the infancy
of the psychological sciences—you can speakto this better than I can—but as someone
in philosophy, I think we’re still at thebeginnings. And we are still in the grip of
early and crude versions of scientific understandingsof how cause and effect operates. So what
we are starting with is very mechanical understandings,and we can understand how people then are
pushed around by biological forces. We canunderstand to some extent how they’re pushed
around by external physical and mechanicalforces. But we do not yet have a sophisticated
enough understanding of the human brain, thehuman mind, human psychology, to understand
how a volitional consciousness can be a causalforce, a causal power in the world.
Right. That’s perfectly well put. So, Ido a detailed analysis that some of the people
who watch me are familiar with, of this movie“Pinocchio,” and Pinocchio has got a very
classical mythological structure, and it basicallyintroduces three elements of being: so there’s
(1) the element of being that’s associatedwith Geppetto; and also (2) the evil tyrannical
forces that are kind of patriarchal in nature,and that’s sort of the “conceptualization
of society”—a benevolent element and amalevolent element, say. And then there’s
(3) the introduction of this other causalfactor and it’s personified in the form
of the Blue Fairy. The Blue Fairy is a manifestationof Mother Nature, and she animates Pinocchio.
So Geppetto creates him, and then sets upa wish for his independence, and then Nature
appears in the guise of the Blue Fairy andgrants that wish. So you have “culture”
and “nature” conspiring to produce a puppetthat could in fact disentangle itself from
its strings. But the movie insists—and itdoes this on profound mythological grounds—that
the puppet itself has a causal role to playin its own … what would you call it … in
its own capacity to transcend the deterministicchains, the deterministic processes which
have given rise to it, that also enslave it.
Um hmm.
You know in all of our profound narratives,I would say—and this is part of the way
that they differ from the scientific account—there’salways that third element. There’s always
the autonomous individual who is, in somesense, you know, lifting himself up by his
own bootstraps.
Yes…
And I don’t think it’s a problem thatscience is unable to account for, but it’s
a very big problem when scientists who areunable to account for that deny that it exists,
because they can’t explain it. That becomesextraordinarily dangerous.
Right. Yes. Once you stop looking, you stoptrying, right? Then you’re left with an
impoverished account. So in a way, there’sa kind of hubris built into the skepticism
that says, “I know that this is a problemthat we just can’t solve, so I’m not going
to try anymore.”
Yeah, well there’s a performative contradictionas well, which is much worth pointing out—because
on the one hand, the scientist might wellclaim, “As far as I’m concerned, from
an epistemological perspective, the only twocausal forces are ‘nature’ and ‘culture.’
But then I’ll go about my actions in thenormative world, as an existential being,
acting in the world, and I will swallow whole-heartedlythe proposition that ‘each individual is
responsible for his own actions’—becausethat’s how I constantly interact with everyone
in the world. And I get very irritated ifthey violate that principle.”
Yes, right. So how you live with your skepticismor your relativism in a way that doesn’t
ensnarl you in tensions and contradictions—that’sa hard project itself.
Well, it does seem to me, I think it’s reasonableto point out that it’s not possible to find
a person who acts as if he or anyone elseis “biologically or culturally determined.”
We just don’t behave that way in the realworld. We act as if we’re responsible for
our own actions, and the consequences of thoseactions.
Right. So then we have a tension between whatour “intellectual theories” are telling
us, and what our kind of “empirical data”is telling us—we don’t have a way to put
those two together, and then what you as anindividual do in response to that tension
between theory and practice—that’s a wholeother can of things to explore.
Right.
But to back up to our discussion about power—It’s interesting that the way our discussion,
up to that point, then integrates three things:(1) We started talking about truth, and then
(2) we started talking about goals and normativeends and ideals, and then (3) we talk about
power.
So there we’ve got already the big three:Truth, Ideals, and Power.
Our discussion about Truth took us into epistemologicalissues in philosophy; our discussion about
Ideals takes us into ethics and meta-ethicsissues and also into philosophy; and our discussion
of Power takes us into issues about humannature, all of which traditionally comprise
a branch of philosophy and its sub-disciplines.
So we already have to have a theory of epistemology[epistemology: the theory of knowledge, especially
with regard to its methods, validity and scope:the investigation of what distinguishes justified
belief from opinion]; a theory of human nature;a theory of ethics—and we can sometimes
try to integrate those—and postmodernismis going to be an integration of certain views
that develop in philosophical traditions inall three of those areas.
So maybe one way to put it is this: If youcontrast it to kind of a—again, taking the
Enlightenment as our touchstone—I thinkwe’re both fans of the Enlightenment—we
say: All right, we’re fine with power. Knowledgeis power, and we want to empower the individual.
We want to eliminate slavery and empower people.We want to eliminate old-fashioned sexism
and empower women. So power is…
Yes, we actually want to remove arbitraryand unnecessary impediments to the expression
of proper power.
That’s right. So there are illegitimateuses of power that are stopping and disempowering
people. So it’s the double-edged sword.And as long as power is properly directed
or properly located, then we are confidentthat, by and large, people individually and
socially will use their power to put togetheruseful lives, build successful economies and
societies, and so forth.
So it’s actually a very optimistic overallassessment about power. But power is then
structured as a means to an end: we want toempower people cognitively—teach them how
to read, teach them how to think, so thatthey themselves can understand the truth and
discover new truths. So “power leads totruth.”
But we also then want people to be free toact on the basis of their power, because then
we think that if people are respected as individualagents, they’re going to be happier and
so they will achieve good goals, and theywill mutually work out together fair agreements
and deals— a kind of “justice,” right?Society will get better and better, and so
forth.
So power is in the service of just socialrelations, and power is in the service of
truth.
Yes, so now that’s a great “justification,”say, for the Enlightenment viewpoint, and
it seems—I don’t want to stop you frompursuing that—but it also seems to me that,
to the degree that that’s true (a validdescription of the Enlightenment aims), and
to the degree that that has actually manifesteditself in reality in the current state of
human affairs, that it’s perhaps unwiseof us to allow our Marxist or our Nietzschean
presuppositions to take too careless a swingat that foundation, given that it’s actually
…Absolutely right, and that’s why the Enlightenment
articulation “Power is good if it’s inthe service of truth”— or “Power is
good if it’s in the service of justice”—thenwe’re fine. And we’re optimistic enough
about human beings, cognitively and morally,that we think that “empowering” them—
giving them lots of freedoms— is going toincrease the net stock of truth, and it’s
going to increase the net stock of justice.So that entire “Enlightenment package”
is precisely what the Counter-Enlightenmentattacks. It attacked very fundamentally so
that by the time we get two to three generationslater— to the generations of Marx and Nietzsche—
it has been hollowed out.So on the epistemological side we don’t
believe that there is such a thing as “truth”anymore. So it’s not the case that “power”
is in the search of “truth,” because wedon’t believe that human beings are capable
of getting to any sort of objective truthanymore. So we’re just left with “power.”
And also on the normative side, we don’tbelieve in “justice” anymore. We don’t
believe that any sort of normative principlesor ethical ideals can be objectively grounded.
And so then, once again, maybe we’re leftwith subjective desires and so forth, but
we’re just left again with “power.”
So power in the service of Truth; power inthe service of Justice: that goes away. All
that we are left with is Power.
Okay, so then we could mount a psycho-analyticcritique of that set of objections. Because
I could say, Okay, here’s some reasons.Let’s assume you’re doing something simple
and easy instead of complicated and difficultwith your objections. And so here’s the
simple and easy explanation:
You want to dispense with the idea of “justice”and “truth” because that lightens your
existential load because now there’s nothingdifficult and noble that you have to strive
for, and you want to reduce everything to“power” because that justifies your use
of power in your pursuit of those immediategoals that you no longer even have to justify
because you don’t have to make referenceto any higher standards of, say, “justice”
or “truth.” And so I would say: That’sa deep, impulsive and resentful nihilism that’s
manifesting itself as a glorious intellectualcritique. [Nihilism: a viewpoint that traditional
values and beliefs are unfounded and thatexistence is senseless and useless.]
Now, I understand as well that there is thehistory of genuine intellectual critique that
you’ve been laying out, which is not trivial—but those things have to be differentiated,
you know. It’s certainly not reasonableeither for those who claim that “all there
is is power,” that they’re not themselvesmotivated equally by that power.
Sure. So in one way, all right, what you canalways say, in effect, is that philosophy
is autobiographical. In many cases philosopherswill put their pronouncements in third-person
form, or in generalized form, but if you alwaysput it down to third-person formulations,
it can be profoundly self-revelatory.
So if you say, for example, “Human beingsare scum”—there you have some sort of
a pessimistic assessment of the human condition.Well, built into that then is the idea that
I, if I “first-personalize it,” that “Iam scum.” What you’re really doing is
a first-person confession. And it’s alwaysthen an illegitimate move to exempt yourself
from the general principle.
Right.
Or: “Everything just is “power relations”and “people imposing their agendas on other
people.” Then what you’re saying is: “Well,my fundamental commitment is power, and I
just want to impose my agenda on other people.”
So I do think you’re right— that it cango both ways: It can of course be that you
have people who, for whatever reason, havea predisposition to nihilistic, amoral power
seeking, and when they become adults and “intellectual,”they latch onto theories that indulge them,
that enable them to rationalize their predispositions.
And so in many cases, yes, a lot of Postmodernism,in some of its manifestations, is disingenuous
in that form. People don’t necessarily buyinto the postmodern philosophical framework,
but rather, in kind of pragmatic form, Postmodernismas a set of “tools” is useful for them
to advance their own personal and social agendas,whatever those happen to be.
Okay. So let’s switch a little bit. Let’sswitch over into that a little bit. I’ve
found our discussion extremely useful on thephilosophical end, but now I would like to
make it a bit more personal, if you don’tmind.
You’re written this book Explaining Postmodernism:Skepticism and Socialism from Rousseau to
Foucault. And it’s a fairly “punchy,”let’s say, critique of Postmodernism and
its alliance with Neo-Marxism. And you’vedone a careful job of laying out the historical
development of both of those movements andtheir alliance.
(1) What was your motivation for doing that;and what have you experienced as a consequence
(1) of writing the book, and (2) as a consequenceof being a professor who’s in the midst
of an academic society that’s basicallyrunning on postmodern principles?
[laughs] Yes, that’s a good trio of questionsthere. Well, my motivations for writing the
book were: One, as an intellectual exercise:here was a movement that was complex, many
philosophical and cultural strands comingtogether, and I enjoy intellectual history
very much—so it was a pleasure for me toread back into the histories and to tease
out all of the lines of developments, andhow things were packaged and repackaged—so
that the postmodern synthesis (as it cametogether in the second third of the 20th century)
came into being. As a purely intellectualhistorical enterprise, I found that fulfilling.
Partly also this was the 1990s, late 1990s,it’s end of the Cold War. One of the things
I had done—not professionally, but justout of personal interest—was read a lot
of political philosophy, read a lot aboutthe Cold War and the intellectual developments—and
call it political developments—that hadgone on there. So I had a very good, I’d
say, amateur working knowledge, before I startedresearching the book, about the history of
Marxism and the history of Cold War geo-politics.
And sort of one of the big questions on everyone’smind of course in the late 1990s with the
fall of the Soviet Union and the end of theCold War is: What’s going to happen next?
So what’s the new geo-political alignmentgoing to be?
Then from my academic position, the big questioninside the intellectual word is: Since far-left
politics had been so prominent and that forgenerations, intellectuals inside the academic
world had largely given the benefit of thedoubt to far-leftist experiments—even going
out of their way to be fellow travelers, andso forth—that by the time you get to the
end of the Cold War, basically everybody,except for a few true believers, is rethinking.
So what does this mean for—not necessarilyleft politics more broadly, but certainly
for far-left politics? And so even the far-leftistsof the leftists are recognizing that they’re
going to have to come up with some sort ofa new strategy in order to remain intellectually
respectable, and some sort of a new strategyin order to become culturally and politically
feasible.
So I did have a kind of a cultural/politicalinterest in what the thinking was on the far
left about what they’re going to do nowthat the Soviet Union has collapsed and the
whole world is shifting more toward a marketliberalism or to some sort of “third way”
centrism.
Yeah, and now that all the corpses have floatedup on the beach, so to speak …
Right. Yes! So you have a huge then amountof empirical data that you have to confront
and…Now, I think this is going to be partof the postmodern package, but there’s a
lot of denial of the relevance of empiricism;there’s a lot of denial of the relevance
of logic and social-scientific statisticalmethods of aggregating that data and reaching
normative conclusions on the basis of that.So we can understand the temptation on the
part of a lot of people to find psychologicaldevices that will enable them to deny the
Gulag and the various other horrible things.By the time the 90s …
Right. When the facts, as even you [of theleft] would have construed them, are stacking
up viciously in contradiction to your theory,it’s time to mount an all-out assault on
what constitutes a “fact.”
Okay, that’s one strategy, and that’sagain one of the sub-strategies I think that
postmoderns will use. So, if you then havephilosophers and social scientists, and people
who are up to speed in their epistemology,who are telling you, Well, you know, there
are just different narratives that are outthere, and there are no such things as objective
facts, and logic does not necessarily pointus in one direction: there are “poly-logics”
or “multiple frameworks”—then if youhave one “framework” that says, “No.
There are objective facts and the logic isall going against your version of political
idealism,” then it’s going to be verytempting for you to say, “Well, I can just
dismiss that as just one narrative way ofconstructing the historical facts: I can come
up with a different narrative that softensor denies altogether …”
And certainly some of the bad-faith postmodernistsdo go down that road very much.
So in part that was my motivation for writingthe book.
And in part I did feel that I was in a goodposition intellectually to do so because my
Ph.D. work had been in logic, philosophy ofscience and epistemology, so I was up to speed
on the entire history of epistemology fromthe modern world on through the way things
were in the 80s and the early 1990s. So Iwas reading the same people that Rorty had.
I have to say I learned an enormous amountfrom reading Richard Rorty. He’s first rate,
even though I end up disagreeing fundamentallywith him about everything … Foucault’s
Ph.D. also was in philosophy; he also hada Ph.D. in psychology. Derrida—another philosophy
Ph.D. Lyotard—another philosophy Ph.D. So,not necessarily putting myself on the same
stature intellectually, but all of us, soto speak, are first-rate educated in epistemology.
So I know where they’re coming from andwhere all of that is going.
At the same time, my undergraduate and master’sdegree at Guelph (just down the road from
you) in history of philosophy—so I had along-standing passion for how arguments and
movements develop over time, so I thoughtI was in a good position to see how postmodernism
had evolved out of various other earlier movementsthat had developed over time—and I am enough
of a political animal to be interested inpolitical philosophy. And I believe that abstract
philosophical theory, when it gets put intopractice, makes life-and-death practical differences
…
So the stakes are high. So I was motivatedthen to put it all together: How does the
history and the philosophy and the politicsall come together in Postmodernism? So I wrote
the book.
Now, yes. How it has affected me personallyin academic life. Well, let me see. In one
way I think I was fortunate that I had tenureby the time the book was published, and my
university is by and large a tolerant place.We have some issues here, but by and large
my colleagues are reasonable, decent people,and at least I was able to get tenure on the
strength of my teaching abilities and my publication.And so it wasn’t that I was going to lose
my job over this.
But of course there is blowback. I did havedifficulty getting the book published in the
first place. Actually I finished writing thebook by the year 2000. I had taken a sabbatical
from 1999-2000 and wrote the book then, butI was not able to get the book published until
2004, and the reason for that was a numberof “desk rejections”—you know, the editor
just sends a form letter back. I got a fewof those. But, more seriously, what happened
three times, possibly four times, I don’tremember exactly now, was it would get past
the editor at the press, and then it wouldbe sent out to two or three reviewers—and
in each case what happened was I would getsplit and polarized-split reviews. One would
come back and say, “This is a really goodbook; he’s done his homework, it’s a good
argument, it’s a fresh argument … I don’tnecessarily agree with all of it, but this
really ought to be out there as a book”;and then the other review on the other side
would be equally savaging: “This is a terriblebook; he doesn’t know his history of philosophy,
he’s butchered this that and the other thing,and I strongly recommend that you don’t
publish this book.” And then almost alwaysin that situation, the editor just says, “No.”
So it wasn’t until late 2003, early 2004,that Scholargy Publishing, which was then
a small press working out of Arizona, tookthe book on, and I’m happy to say that after
it was published, it’s been in print consistentlysince then.
Yes, that’s remarkable. That’s remarkable.
Yes, so I’m very happy about that …
For any book, let alone an academic book.
Yes, and then multiple translations, and thosecontinue, so I’m happy about that.
Now I’d say the scholarly responses havebeen from moderate liberals: so kind of traditional
… don’t necessarily want to use the word“traditional,” but from rational, naturalistic,
liberal thinkers, conservatives and libertarians:the reviews have all been strong, and strongly
positive.
But I have not received any formal reviewsfrom any of the postmodern or far-left journals,
so I’m not sure what that means, but thereis, at least at some level, an unwillingness
to engage ...
Well, it might be a sign of respect.
Well there is one sign of respect that comesout, and that is that every… I’d say once
a year or so … probably a dozen times sincethe book has been published, I’ve been asked
by the editor of a postmodern or close fellow-traveler,critical-theory-type of journal, to be a second
reviewer on one of their articles. So I’m“in their Rolodex,” so to speak—to use
the old-fashioned label—when they are actuallylooking for someone who is likely to give
an objective but critical perspective on somearticle that’s been submitted to the journal—once
in a while my name floats up and they’llsend it out to me, so I’ll just do the standard
thing of reading it and giving my professionalopinion of it.
So I think they are aware of me, but therehasn’t really been any direct intellectual
engagement, which is kind of sad.
Right. Yes. So now when you set yourself upto write the book, were you thinking of writing
a critique of postmodernism, or were you thinkingof conducting an exploration of postmodernism?
Well, right now I’m working on the critique.The first book ends—I don’t want to say
abruptly—but it does end with the door opento saying: How then do we respond to this
dead end of Counter-Enlightenment thoughtin postmodernism? So we’re at a point culturally
where the meaning of postmodernism has nowinfected the academy and you see problems
there, but it’s also left the academy, andso thoughtful people outside the academy are
seeing the results. And so the big questionis: What do we do next?
So I am actively working on the sequel toExplaining Postmodernism now. And I did go
back and forth in the writing of it. My firstpurpose was to write a straight diagnosis
and intellectual history of postmodernism,and that’s where I ended up leaving it,
because in one sense this was a bit artificial,but I really like 200-page books. It’s long
enough for you to get into a subject deeplyenough and to make a good, pointed, integrated
argument and then stop.
And so I realized if I wrote the sequel then,it would be a 400-page book, and I thought
it was more important to get this self-containedintellectual history of postmodernism out
there. So I brought things to I think a logicalconclusion where I ended the book, and now
I’m working on the next.
What’s the next one called?
The working title … it changes every fewmonths or so—sometimes I think about, The
Fate of the Enlightenment or something todo with Neo-Enlightenment or—it won’t
be this—but Post-Postmodernism or AfterPostmodernism—something like that.
Okay. We’ve been struggling with terminologyas well with the people I’m been talking
with about such things.
It’s a very hard thing to do, because aswe’ve seen philosophically, Postmodernism
is multi-dimensional: it’s a metaphysicalcritique, it’s a normative critique, it’s
a political critique, it’s an epistemologicalset of views. And so the alternative then
also has to be integrated philosophically.There has to be an entire philosophical package—so
what label is going to capture all of thatand at the same time make a connection to
postmodernism—and also, I’m basicallyan optimistic positive guy, so I want something
that has a positive …
Yes, illuminates the pathway forward.
Yes, that’s right, yes. Making the worlda better place
Right. Exactly, exactly. So look—I thinkan hour-and-a-half interview is approximately
the equivalent of a 200-page book.
So we’re done.
Why don’t we end with that, and what I wouldlike to propose is that we have another discussion
in a couple of months about what you’rethinking about with regards to what you’re
writing now.
So, like, we’ve covered the intellectualterritory; we’ve covered the historical
territory; and done a reasonably good jobI think of both “justifying” postmodernism
in this discussion, and also pointing outits pitfalls and dangers.
Sure, yes.
We haven’t outlined much for an alternativevision except making tangential reference
to the potency of individual capacity, butthat would seem to be reasonable grounds for
the next discussion. So …
What else would be worth, next time we chat,talking about are the current culture war
issues. You know, one of the things I’mvery interested in is younger people in particular
who are in the front lines in universities,so to speak, and they’re surrounded and
bewildered and angry, and in some cases, intimidatedby all of this “micro-aggressions” and
so forth, and in some cases the indoctrinationthey’re getting …
But I’m actually kind of glad that we didn’ttalk about the more political end of it today,
because it enabled us to have a conversationthat was almost entirely philosophical in
nature, and I really think that’s the rightlevel of analysis, because the battle that’s
occurring in our culture is actually occurringat a philosophical level. I mean, there’s
other levels as well, but that’s even moreimportant than the political level as far
as I’m concerned.
Well said. I agree one-hundred percent. Nicelyput.
All right. Well, it was a pleasure speakingwith you—it was very much worthwhile.
For me too, thanks much.
You have a remarkable capacity for trackingthe content of conversations and keeping them
on point, so that’s quite amazing to see,because we did branch out in a lot of different
directions, more or less simultaneously, andit was quite helpful in keeping the conversation
on track that you could so rapidly organizethe … You know, it was almost like you were
putting a paragraph structure in the conversationas it occurred, so that was something that
was really interesting to see.
So, anyways, it was a pleasure meeting you,and thanks very much for talking with me.
I’ll obviously put a link … I’ve beenrecommending your book like …
My pleasure. Much respect for the work you’redoing. Thanks for having me on your show,
and will be happy to talk again.
Great. Good. We’ll set that up.
All right. Thanks Jordan. Bye.
See you. Yep. Bye bye.