Good. Welcome to "Psychology 230." Thank you for being here. What I'll do today
 I'm going to start by giving you an overview of
 the content of the lecture. Then I will give you an overview of the requirements
 at the end. But let's just start with the content right away.

 There is a website, I don't like "blackboard," so I have my own website.
 You can go to jordanbpeterson.com, and there you will find a menu that lists all courses
 and displays the full study guide. So all the information you will need
 about the lecture you can find there, including most of the reading material.
 But there is also a book, I assume the majority of you have already purchased it.
 It also lists the other things you need to know, such as which days the tests will take place,
 what the assignments are, but I'll cover that at the end of the lesson.
 To begin with, I will tell you what the college is about so you can decide
 whether that is something for you or not.
 Personality theory is a peculiar domain within psychology because it has a number
 includes sub-disciplines that are not particularly well matched.
 For example, it includes clinical psychology and experimental psychology.
 It also includes an approach that is fundamentally individual, and an approach that is
 analyzes individual traits in large groups, which is what you usually have to do in experimental psychology.
 It's also a strange hybrid of philosophy,
 architecture, medicine and science. You could think of medicine as a science
 but it is not, because it is about promoting health,
 and health is not a scientific category. It is a necessary category
 determined by values. For you have to decide what constitutes health and what constitutes disease.
 Or what constitutes well-being, and what constitutes pathology. And you can't possibly do that
 without making value judgments.
 That's especially true of psychology, because when you think about what's healthy
 personality, you usually don't just think about the absence of pathology.
 You think about the presence of positive characteristics. Someone who is completely healthy,
 Mentally and physically. The psychologists, especially the humanistic psychologists
 from the 1960s, see a person as truly mentally healthy when he has realized himself.
 That means he is full
 has developed positive potential, whatever that may be. Because of these idiosyncrasies, personality theory,
 a lecture on personality theory should cover a great deal.
 So this college is very broad. Elements of cultural history are discussed,
 elements of moral philosophy, and elements that, in my opinion, are almost entirely biological.
 That way, it gives you a multidimensional view of what it means to
 to be human.
 I also have some other guidelines that I follow while teaching this lecture.
 One of them is that I don't want to tell you anything that I think is
 is not useful to you. There is a difference between a fact and a useful fact.
 There are many facts, you can drown in facts with Google.
 Undoubtedly you do that every day. But a useful fact transforms the way
 you see the world, or the way you act, in a way that you
 helpful. So another way of describing useful is as relevant.
 One of the guidelines I follow is that I don't want to teach you anything
 that is irrelevant. And my criteria for being relevant, first: does it help you
 in person? Are the things you learn immediately meaningful to how
 you act in your life? And second: are there any indications that the facts you
 will be provided, be of social benefit,
 or political or economic usefulness? So that your knowledge makes a difference
 in the way you act, and that, that also affects the people around you.
 For those various reasons, I have compiled this material.

 That means you have to take into account a number of things,
 before you enroll in this college. And there is another lecture on personality theory,
 at the same time. At least in this semester. It could be that, that college
 suits you better than this college. But I can tell you how this college will be
 expired. So if that's not what you want, or if you're not there
 interested, then you should not attend this lecture. First
 you have to read a lot. It's less than what it used to be
 but it is still a lot. And much of it is original
 material, both from the personality theorists and
 of the empirical pieces. So it's not just a lot of reading,
 but it is quite difficult reading. I think it is useful, according to
 the definition I have given. I think read what I offer you
 will be good for you. But if you don't have time to read a lot
 you will find college frustrating.
 Because of its emphasis on clinical theorists, what an important one
 is part of personality theory, in particular classical personality theory,
 the elements of personality theory that students are generally most interested in,
 there is a lot of philosophical material. And it is philosophical
 because it's about how a person should live. And that's one
 very different question than what a person is. How someone should live
 or how someone can transform themselves, or act to transform themselves
 so that his personality, so to speak, "gets better." You can use "healthier"
 instead of better, but in the context we are talking about,
 is that difference trivial.
 The last thing I want to warn you about is that I don't lecture on the basis of
 the reading material. Often I myself will not know exactly what I am going to tell you
 when I come to class. I know the material, but I don't want to be tied down to a prescribed schedule.
 I want to talk to you about things that are important to me. With a bit of luck
 the lectures will therefore be worthwhile to attend and listen to. But if you need more
 have the need, from your temperament, for a college where things hurt
 be orderly built up, develop linearly, be predictable,
 and that the lectures follow the reading material, then this is not a suitable lecture for you.
 I guess that's the case if you're orderly. That is by the way
 one of the components of the "Big Five" personality model. Orderly people
 are often conscientious. But they like when things are organized and straightforward.
 I'm not that orderly. I score higher on openness, and openness is a creativity dimension.
 People who are open tend to associate fairly freely when they speak, and many different ones
 domains to cover. Some people like that. For example, if you like literature,
 you will probably find this lecture interesting. If you don't like that, then you probably won't find it interesting.
 Well, that's enough warning. I will tell
 what we're going to talk about.
 One of the things that make people unique is the fact that we have self-awareness.
 Ethologists, people who study animal behavior, are doing pretty basic
 tests for self-awareness in animals. One of the most famous demonstrations of
 self-awareness is the mirror test. What you do in the mirror test,
 you take an animal, a chimpanzee, or a three-year-old child, and you put one
 draw on their forehead or nose with lipstick. And then you show them their reflection
 in a mirror. And if they wipe the mark, or point to it,
 you can assume they understand that they see themselves
 in the mirror. That they at least understand well enough to see the mirror
 to be used as an aid to the action with their hand, or that with which they point,
 and the reflection. Dolphins seem capable of this, a number of members
 of the corvids, in fact crows and ravens, which are
 highly intelligent, and they seem to have basic self-awareness. Dolphins I already said,
 cetaceans in general, so whales, although I don't know if all whales have self-consciousness.
 Because it's hard to find a mirror big enough for a blue whale.
 People, and that was it. I don't think that's a very good definition of self-awareness,
 because the fact that you can recognize yourself ... it's not fair to either
 animals like dogs, because dogs would need a "smell mirror",
 and most animals are smell oriented. Most of their brains are structured around the olfactory system
 as core. Unlike us, because our brains are structured with the visual system
 at the core, and that makes us peculiar. So it is unfair to animals like
 dogs or rats, which rely primarily on smell to orient themselves.
 But the point is, which I don't think is a good definition of self-awareness,
 it is very basic.
 You can say that it is the first step to self-awareness. Because if you
 are completely self-aware, you need two other things. You need the power
 to imitate, which is much more important than people generally think.
 I would say it is as important as language.
 I'm not even sure you can use language if you can't imitate. First,
 all the words you use are words other people use. Otherwise you will not
 are very understandable. The fact that you speak means you
 relies on imitation to get your message across. You need imitation
 because once you can imitate, you can use your body as a means of representation
 to represent the world and other people. You can even use your body as a representation
 of yourself. For example, what you do when you
 joke tells at a party and you parody yourself, and everyone laughs.
 And when it comes to language, language allows you to be sophisticated
 to construct models of the world, which are well articulated, which you can exchange with other people, and which makes it possible to think.

 To have self-awareness you must be able to recognize that you exist
 in this physical form, here and now. You must be able to imitate
 because that's how you understand yourself and other creatures like you,
 which is an important part of self-awareness. Everything i about
 your teachings will help me understand myself
 for better or for worse. And with language we cannot only do our representations
 of each other and the world, but we can also store those articulated representations
 for a very long time. We do this partly in rituals, in which we
 represent a representation physically. And partly we do that with stories,
 which are, in a sense, an articulated representation of bodily action. Because you can see a story
 like drama. A drama is behavior that represents behavior. And a story is
 an articulated version of a drama. We have very old rituals, and very
 old stories. Part of what we will do in this college is to go back as close as possible
 to the beginning, to understand how people themselves
 understood and represented throughout human history. And we do that
 because we want to be able to place our current knowledge in a historical context.

 Because, one of the things that characterizes a human personality,
 is that it is a historical phenomenon. Undoubtedly you hear in many lessons
 that much of your personality is a cultural construct. Or that now
 is a lot or not, it doesn't matter. Part of it is for sure, an important part,
 you are a cultural being. You come from a tradition
 which has been shaped in countless ways by a very long past,
 historical and biological. That means if you do, your history
 does not understand your relevant past, not just any collection
 facts, then you don't understand yourself. People in their self-conscious form,
 we don't know how old we are. Biologically or genetically identical
 creatures to us existed 150 thousand years ago. But it seems we discovered fire
 and were able to control it about two million years ago. That requires quite a bit
 intelligence. And there are artifacts that attest to a fairly high cultural level
 that are at least 50 thousand years old. So we cannot say exactly when we became fully self-aware.
 And we could also say we're still not fully self-aware,
 because what do we actually know about ourselves?
 We are very complex. At most you have a limited model of who you are,
 and that constantly fails. Because you keep doing things that
 surprise you, and often not in a particularly positive way. The mystery remains.
 That means we'll outline the context first,
 the historical context. I want to do that in two ways. The first thing that wants to do
 is to discuss mythological representations of personality. And that is more important
 than you may think. It's probably more important than you actually think.
 By myth I mean the representations of people in very old and timeless stories.
 Some of them are the stories you find in religious traditions,
 but there are also oral traditions that accompany religious traditions. If we assume
 the recorded religious traditions, and there are fairytales too, and things like that,
 and standard narratives that people used to navigate
 in the world. And most of the clinical theories we're going to discuss, like Freud's theory,
 and Jung's theory, and the theory of the existentialists and phenomenologists,
 and the humanists, et cetera, are variations on those mythological stories.
 This is partly because ... Nietzsche once said that a philosopher was rarely anything other than
 an unconscious advocate for the prevailing cultural worldview. He meant that
 you've always had assumptions. Some of them
 are anchored in your behavior. For example, if you are attending a funeral,
 do you know how to behave. You are generally quiet and reverent. You may not be able
 Explain the rules a person must obey at a funeral, but you can. You can
 maybe explain them if you think about it, but it's not like you follow those rules
 when you go to a funeral. You just know what to do. If anyone were to push, you would
 make a list of rules. But in fact it is coded in your behavior.
 You automatically know what to do. You can see it when you handle
 with someone who is very social, you see that he is not aware
 is processing the way he acts, because then he would be self-aware and uncomfortable.
 He behaves smoothly. That is automated behavior, and it is coded "in him".
 And if you're a great philosopher, what you do according to Nietzsche is your behavior
 and observe your thoughts, and describe it.
 You are not so much inventing new ideas as articulating the nature of
 the structures that are already there.
 Imagine that you are particularly interested in wolves.
 So you go out and study some wolves, and one of the things you see is that
 the wolves have a social hierarchy. There is a leader, and then there is a battle
 in the pack to see who will become the dominant leader. That poses a problem,
 because when wolf A and wolf B fight, and they are similar,
 and they tear each other up, then wolf C comes and takes them both.
 That's not a useful strategy for wolf A and wolf B. And then the pack loses
 the power of wolf A and wolf B, so that's not functional. What has happened,
 is that wolves have developed strategies for dominance and submission. So that they can determine
 who will lead, and who will follow, without
 having to engage in a physical fight that will cause damage.
 What usually happens is that two wolves face off, you probably have cats
 sometimes see them do this when they meet on the street. The first thing they do
 is to turn to the side and blow themselves up, and they dance back and forth,
 quite comical. But what the cat tries to do is look big
 he tries to make the other cat so nervous that he leaves. And what wolves do
 is about the same. They blow themselves up so they look big, make all kinds of savage
 noises, and they threaten each other. And usually one wolf will give in
 Lie down, lie on his back, and expose his throat. That means something like:
 "I'm useless and pathetic, and you can bite my throat if you want to."
 And another wolf thinks, "Yeah you're pretty useless and pathetic, but
 we need you tomorrow to get a deer, so
 you can get up and protect your miserable self, and that's okay. ”Seeing that,
 you might say, "Wolves follow rules." But they don't, that is
 just their behavior. When you describe what the wolves do, you turn it into a rule.
 But it was not originally a rule. It was a pattern of behavior.
 That's how people are. We are full of behavioral patterns. And that is
 the result of our biology. Which we'll talk about in detail in the second half
 of the course. And it is a result of our culture. And that is built into our body.
 Everytime you hang out with someone he'll tell you how
 you have to behave. "Don't be too slow." "Try to be witty."
 "Tell something interesting." "Don't be so obnoxious." "If you something
 funny, make sure it's really funny. "" Take turns speaking. "" Play nicely. "
 "Wait your turn." "Don't eat all the bread." Etcetera.
 If you don't follow those rules, people will raise an eyebrow. Or they don't laugh
 for your jokes. Or they look away. Or they roll their eyes when you enter
 which is a very bad sign by the way. You will be severely punished for it.
 And when you act the way they want people to smile at you
 they invite you over for dinner, maybe you're in a relationship
 and people who like you. So we exchange information about
 how to manifest ourselves physically, in every interaction.
 That shapes the way we act.
 The problem is, you don't really understand the consequences.
 You can act intuitively based on your social skills,
 and the degree to which you interact with other people, but that doesn't mean that
 you can consciously formulate all implicit rules.
 And if you think you can ... Imagine a well-behaved four-year-old.
 When you are four, you have mastered many of the social rules because when you are four, you can play
 with others. If you're ever going to be able to, you can do it at the age of four.
 If you can't do that by the age of four, you have a serious problem. Because other children
 don't play with you, and then you don't learn how to behave. And then you remain immature
 and isolated. In a corner, dejected and bitter
 for the rest of your life. You may think that what is harsh, but it is not.
 That's what the data points to.
 We have shaped our behavior,
 since we are social. Then you ask the question: "How long have we been social?"
 Crustaceans are social. Cancer, for example, organize themselves into social hierarchies,
 and they adapt each other's behavior. And that is 400 million years old.
 We are social and live in groups since our ancestors separated in evolution
 of the ancestors of lobsters. That is a very long time.
 Then there were no trees yet. Social life is older than trees. So you can be sure
 that you are highly adapted to it. It's built into your biology,
 but there is also a historical element. We are quite flexible from one
 cultural perspective.
 There is one example, someone named Robert Sapolsky, who I like, he is
 a great scientist. He went to Africa to study baboons. And baboons are generally not friendly.
 They fight a lot. They are bullies. They bite. They can bite hard.
 A feline is not likely to attack a baboon. They have large teeth.
 And their temperament is not particularly positive. Sapolsky studied a group
 baboons, with typical baboon behavior, bother each other
 and bullying. They were very stressed. Sapolsky knew that
 because he measured their testosterone levels and things like that. It was
 a pretty miserable life as a baboon. But then what happened was the baboons somewhere
 went for food, and many got tuberculosis.
 And almost all very aggressive males got tuberculosis and died,
 and only the "beta males" remained. And then it transformed
 the whole baboon culture, which made them much more friendly and cooperative.
 And if aggressive baboons entered only that territory,
 they also became calm and calm. That's interesting, because of course
 Baboons aren't as social as we are, but it does indicate that too
 developed primates (their brains are quite large, but not as big as ours), that cultural
 transfer of behavioral expectation, can be very strong and can transform quite quickly.
 We have shaped each other's behavior for a very long time.
 And much of it is coded deeply in biology and in culture.
 From an organic point of view, we'll discuss this in detail in the organic part ...
 One of the ways you can tell how social you are is by seeing how much pain and shame you are experiencing
 if you make a social mistake. When you're at a party and you embarrass yourself
 depending on your level of "neuroticism," which is a Big Five trait
 that indicates how sensitive you are to negative feelings, you may be
 obsessed with your stupidity for the next three or four months, or even years.
 People don't like social exclusion. You have a small counter
 in the back of your brain, that roughly
 estimate how successful you are. There seems to be an estimate
 during birth, when your neurotic level is set. That can be adjusted,
 to some extent, through learning processes. If you are a "tall" baboon, you will
 Experiencing less negative emotions, and more pleasure, than when you are a "low" baboon.
 And it is exactly the same in humans. We like to rise in the social hierarchy.
 And we like to be near the top of the social hierarchy. And as the counter
 in the back of your brain notices that you are doing a good job
 rises in the social hierarchy, it produces more serotonin.
 Then you will experience less pain and less depression.
 And less tension, less stress, et cetera. So there is
 a biological basis for our social existence, and it is very important to us how we get into it
 social groups.
 We've been trying to find out what we are, who we are,
 for thousands of years. Partly as a result of imitation, because
 I can act like you, and that helps me understand who you are. And partly if
 a consequence of articulated communication. Much of it consists of stories.
 We have no idea since when people tell stories. When you visit nations
 who have no written language, and who were isolated from the rest of society,
 for thousands of years (such peoples still exist), you will find that
 they tell stories, they dance, they represent each other. We know that tendency
 to tell stories and perform rituals is much older than our ability to write.
 I think it is at least 50 thousand years old, although I suspect that
 it is much older. Over time we started
 by telling stories about each other that represent how we act.
 And some of those stories are interesting and we remember, and others we don't.
 And we continue to remember and pass on the interesting and memorable stories.
 You can imagine how people gathered in groups of thousands,
 for thousands of years, telling each other stories,
 and get those stories into some kind of acceptable and understandable form.
 For example, if you look at the creation story,
 the creation story in Genesis in the Old Testament, that's part of it
 a group of creation stories, characteristic of the mythology of the Middle East. It seems to have arisen
 through the organization of various Middle Eastern tribes thousands of years ago,
 each with its own traditions, to a relatively homogeneous story, which was characteristic
 for the most important beliefs of a large group of people. So we have information on how we act
 through its representations, which we have passed down,
 and a lot of it takes the form of mythology, religious stories. We go
 start the lecture with two themes that lay foundations. The first
 has to do with the structure of mythological representations, and the second has to do with
 a collection of rituals, processes and beliefs found all over the world
 and dealing with shamanic transformation.
 The title of this lecture is "Personality and Its Transformations," the reason for that
 is because you are not who you are. You're something
 constantly changing. You are more like a river than a stone. You are constantly transforming.
 The physicist Erwin Schrödinger thought people
 composite structures. It's an interesting idea. A composite structure is a structure
 which maintains its shape, while its elements change completely.
 If you let the water drain from the sink, you get a whirlpool, right? The whirlpool
 is a fairly stable entity, but the water that makes up the basin is constantly changing.
 That is a composite structure. So are you. Your shape remains the same
 over time, but your elements keep changing. And humans are very changeable beings.
 Unlike animals, because animals are more or less what they are,
 and that's it. They have the ability to learn, but that doesn't go very far.
 The typical beaver does much the same today as its distant ancestor
 five thousand years ago. There is no real culture building, while we humans,
 we transform very strongly. We do that culturally. There are so many things
 that are different now from twenty years ago, you can, you hardly can
 introduce.
 We transform quite quickly on a cultural level, but we do that individually.
 You have all just made the transition to college.
 In a number of ways you are the same as in high school,
 but hopefully you are better in many ways now than you were in high school.
 You should be more mature, and your personality can be greatly transformed.
 And with a little luck you will not be finished with your transformations.
 It will stay that way for the rest of your life
 if you are a dynamic person, have your eyes open, are attentive, and
 can learn. You can say that the most stable part of it
 the personality, the ability to change. And it is worth it
 to know. Because one of the things I can tell you about the great myths
 of humanity (there are many, with different themes), but one of the most
 powerful themes are: you overcome your problems by transforming your personality.
 You actually always do that when you learn something. Because you learn something
 and hopefully you are something different than before. Hopefully different
 in an important way, and hopefully differently in a way that helps you solve problems
 that you couldn't solve before. You can say that one of the leitmotifs of human life is:
 “When I encounter an obstacle, I can transform myself and discover a way
 to pass it. ”And that makes us quite remarkable.
 Which I could suggest to you, and I think this is one of the biggest ideas
 that exist (that can be communicated in this short time frame) is that it is better
 to identify with your ability to transform, than to identify with who you are now.
 That can save you a lot of trouble. One of the things that characterize
 ideologues, or people trapped in fixed belief systems, is them
 worship who they are now. And that would be fine if everything was one hundred percent
 would go well with them, but that is rarely the case. So unless your life is perfect
 and that's highly unlikely, it might be better if you were someone else.
 That's all you have because change the world in a way
 that will make you feel better ... You might succeed
 in a limited area, but the chances that this can, or should, on a large scale,
 is quite small.
 So in the section on mythological representation I'll be going to the basic
 discuss elements of the story. I think, that's necessary because there
 are two things to consider when talking about people.
 First, objectively, what is a person? In the same way as you
 examine a rat or a stone. That's a scientific question.
 But then there is one more question, or maybe two questions: how do people act?
 And: how should they act? And maybe the first is a scientific question,
 but the second is certainly not. And the way in which we investigate how people act
 and how they should act has much more to do with storytelling than science.
 You know that. Think about it,
 How do you get most of your information about what people are like, if you aren't
 actually interacts with people? The answer is quite simple:
 you read novels, you read literature, you watch movies, you watch "Game of Thrones,"
 you watch "Star Wars," you may be standing
 three days in line, if you're completely insane, to watch Star Wars.
 Then you can ask, "What the hell are you doing?" People hunger for information
 about how people act, and how they should act. And we are fascinated by stories.
 That has a reason. You know what a story is and what isn't.
 You go to a movie and think, "The development of the characters
 was good, but the story was bad. ”Then you talk to
 your friends about why it was a bad story. But the strange thing is that you actually already know.
 Some things are stories and some are not. And explain some something
 making a story is difficult. But you do know, and you can even agree on it.
 If you look at "IMDB" or "Rotten Tomatoes", there is great agreement
 about what an acceptable story is, pretty quickly. There seems to be a certain
 amount to be consistent, with some individual differences.
 The mythological and shamanic talks we will have have a number of purposes.
 One is to provide you with basic concepts that you can use
 to understand stories. That will be very useful because most
 clinical theories we will cover are actually story-based.
 And once you understand the underlying mythological structure, you have a framework
 within which you can place the theories. What is complicated about it
 personality theory, is that there are many theories. And you may think:
 "How is that possible?" Because if it's a theory
 can be only one. Just as there is only one theory of relativity,
 there is some confusion at the borders, but everyone agrees on the core elements.
 There are many different theories in personality theory.
 Then you might think, "How are you going to make sense of that?"
 In two ways. First, by anchoring them all in a more fundamental structure,
 and that is something I am trying to achieve with this course.
 Second, by adopting a different set of assumptions
 about personality theories.
 You can say, "There is only one theory of relativity."
 "Yes, there is only one theory of relativity, but consider a toolbox."
 Maybe some of you are handy, and you have a toolbox. What's in a tool box?
 Hammers, or a hammer, saws, wrenches, pliers, clamps, et cetera. And you can say:
 "Tools, what do you need all those tools for?" And the answer is:
 "You can hit a nail with a wrench, but it would be better to
 to use a hammer. And you could knock a bolt off with a hammer, but it would be better
 to use a wrench. "When you try to do something
 what is complicated and complex, why not use different tools? Normally
 we don't see scientific theories as tools, although they are. Above all, they are tools.

 And if we're dealing with something as complex as a human, maybe we have
 requires more than one tool to get the job done.
 To say that you understand a person is a complicated thing.
 You may ask, "Understand for what purpose?" You don't mean complete, universal,
 comprehensive understanding. You mean, "I want to know X about someone because
 I want something in my dealings with him. ”There are all kinds
 tools that can help with this. I'd say Freud is a microscope
 and Jung a telescope. That's how you can see it. There is no reason
 that I compared them to those two instruments, but the point is
 that if you carefully study personality theories, they improve your ability
 represent yourself, in very useful ways. Because you have to understand
 who you are, and why, and what consequences this has for you. Because you can transform
 but you also have a fairly stable underlying structure.
 Otherwise you would be soft like an octopus. You are a curious dynamic combination of a relative
 permanent structure, with the capacity to transform. You have your own nature, and
 understanding your nature is very rewarding. Hopefully you will
 during this lecture you get a number of tools to understand yourself and others.
 Tools that are really useful, things that you can use on a daily basis
 understand yourself and your family, and improve your future, with a little luck.
 We will also discuss the elements that are stable, most of which have been discovered,
 at least in the more objective sense, by biological psychologists. Especially by
 animal research, strangely enough.
 Well, mythological representations, we're going back in time.
 We are going to look at archaic and ancient stories of humanity, as people have told each other.
 I'll focus on stories that already ... we don't know
 how old they are. We have stories that are four thousand years old in written form.
 But all the evidence indicates that those stories are based on traditions that are much older,
 at least fifty thousand years, and maybe even older. We'll check them out,
 and that will give us a foundation on which to build. After that we go
 View shamanic rituals and descriptions to get a feel for the archetype of transformation.
 What do you have to undergo when you change?
 What will you experience when that happens? I can already say something about that.
 It is not always the case, it may rarely be the case that if you do something
 important teaches that it is pleasant. This happens to people all the time.
 Maybe you recently had a relationship where things went completely wrong.
 Maybe it was because your friend was a bastard, or maybe
 are you not so sensible. No doubt you are trying to find out
 which option is the right one, when you think about the relationship.
 What usually happens to people when they move towards a certain goal, and it goes wrong,
 because something happens that they do not understand and could not foresee,
 maybe in their own behavior, maybe you had an affair during your relationship, and you did
 not expected ... What is happening is that your current model of yourself and maybe
 even of the world turns out to be wrong. That upsets you very much.
 Then you are upset for a while, little motivated, somewhat depressed, quite tense,
 you collapse, you don't know what to do. And if you are lucky
 you think about it, and you talk about it, and you get up again. And when you get there
 you've gone through, you're a bit smarter, a bit stronger than you
 was before.
 If you're unlucky, you'll be left in the dumps. People can stay in for a very long time
 stay put, and that's not a good thing. The transformation process
 is quite dangerous because it is not necessary
 to finish successfully. But is there a pattern, and it usually is:
 you think you know what you are doing, and then something happens that makes it clear
 that you don't know what you're doing. And then you have a problem. And through
 careful analysis, support and conversations (and other processes we don't really understand),
 you integrate the unknown knowledge that brought you down,
 you reconstruct your personality, and your representations of the world. And then you move forward again.
 Hopefully better than before. But that's interesting to know.
 Nietzsche said you can see how much character someone has
 by how much truth he can handle. That's an interesting statement,
 for people, because they are optimistic, generally regard the truth
 as something positive. "Obviously it is better to know the truth." No, if you
 usually fools yourself, finding out the truth is not a pleasant experience.
 That doesn't mean you shouldn't,
 but the idea that the road to enlightenment is a pleasant one is not very intelligent.
 The opposite is true.
 Shamanistic rituals make this visible in an archetypal way.
 What you see happening with the typical ... shamanism is also a worldwide phenomenon,
 and it appears to be related to a primitive or archaic psychology of transformation.
 Often resources are used. What generally happens is that the shamanic transformation is accompanied
 by descending into some kind of psychological death, and then rebuilding,
 a rebirth from which the person emerges. Like an initiation ritual,
 you can see it that way. Or you can see it as
 the depression you experienced during your first semester in college,
 which made you leave university, because that happens to a lot of people,
 or whatever you overcame, to eventually become a student. Although that may be
 was not a pleasant transition. We tested students,
 and it is interesting to note that about a third of you meet the criteria for
 clinical depression in your first year. I think that indicates the criteria for
 clinical depression a bit too sensitive. Because if
 a third of the people meet the criteria, you think: "Yes, that's a bit sensitive."
 Nevertheless, it is not an easy transition. Your old "self" must die.
 In general, that is not pleasant. And that's a good way to think about it
 obstacles to learning. Because you rarely learn anything without being part of you
 dies first. Therefore, people have resistance to learning things like that
 are new and important.
 Okay, then we'll talk about Piaget.
 Piaget isn't known as a personality psychologist, but that's okay.
 Piaget was a developmental psychologist, perhaps the most important.
 He has published many books, many of which have not yet been translated.
 And some have not even been published yet. Piaget has thought about many things.
 He is known for his phase theory of development,
 but he wasn't very fond of it. It seems to be part of his body of thought
 that simplistic Western intellectuals found the easiest,
 and that's why it's usually about that. But Piaget was a very sophisticated thinker.
 What he was interested in was how a child was
 "boots itself up." That's how you can see it. Because if you
 Turn on a computer, what then happens is that it has some simple functions
 start up first. And those functions make it possible to do more complex
 to start up. And those functions make it possible to start up even more complex functions.
 And soon your computer is ready for you. People are like that.
 If we are just born, we are very primitive. Are we very immature,
 that's better wording. We're not really primitive
 because our brains are quite large, and those brains contain more connections at birth
 than in the rest of your life, which is interesting. You actually die
 to become a person. Because you don't make new connections so much
 it's the connections you don't use that disappear. That is free
 peculiar.
 If you are a newborn, you don't have many capacities to trade
 in the world. Your mouth works, your lips and your tongue, which is good
 because you need breastfeeding, which is not easy.
 You need understanding for that, and it is the first complex social interaction true
 you participate in. You are born with some sophisticated
 functional networks, but the rest is hardly available.
 You can't control your arms. When you look at a young baby in a crib,
 and he is not wrapped up, his arms float around in space, and so are his legs.
 And every now and then they hit themselves, and it usually seems
 to be a shock to the baby. It is the periphery of the nervous system. Those elements of
 the central nervous system are not yet developed at birth. It's almost like the baby
 must discover his limbs. It expands itself, from the center. He needs his limbs
 discover, and figure out what to do with it.
 What Piaget was trying to do was describe the processes by which a child is himself
 developed in the world. That has a biological basis, because you are born
 with some available reflexes. And those reflexes are enough to
 to boot you. This is one way of understanding Piaget,
 that I like. It simplifies things a bit too much, but it works. There are many different
 ways to think about what the world consists of.
 If you are a classic scientist, you tend to think that the world is made of matter.
 And matter is made up of atoms, and atoms are made up of ... who knows
 what atoms consist of, because when you look inside atoms,
 you have no idea what's going on there. But we usually don't think there
 about, and we assume a Newtonian reality, in which everything
 is made up of hard little particles, like dust, and that's the scientific model.
 But there are other ways of looking at the world that are not only equally valid,
 but also just as necessary, and just as powerful. One is that you can see the world
 as a matrix of information. And information generally has relevance
 and meaning. At least, as we humans conceptualize information.
 For example, if you are two years old and you crawl on the ground,
 and the dog has a bone, you take it, and the dog bites you, that is informative.
 Piaget stated that children come into the world with an "information seeking" structure,
 and that when they act in the world, phenomena appear, which they can model with their bodies.
 For example, if I am going to drink this, I have to model it with my hand before I
 can do that. It turns out that if this thing is here,
 especially when I'm thirsty, and I'm looking at it, my eyes get my hands ready to take it.
 So when you say you understand something that means
 that when you perceive it, you map it with your body. That happens on free
 low levels of your nervous system.
 For example, there are people who are blind. They say they are blind, they can
 see nothing. But if you move your hands like that, and ask which hand
 you hold up, they can indicate that, with an accuracy of almost one hundred percent.
 You think, "How is that possible? They are blind."
 That happens because your eyes detect patterns in the world, some of those patterns
 perceive yourself as conscious reality, but other patterns are only mapped on your spinal cord,
 or on your emotional system. You do not need to observe the object
 to activate it. Because you probably think:
 "There is the world, you see it, you think about it, you evaluate it, and then you act."
 It doesn't work that way, it rarely works that way. Partly because that a lot
 is too slow. If you had to think about everything, you would be pedestrians incessantly
 drive up. You have to be able to respond very quickly, and you do,
 because your senses map things directly to your motor systems.
 For Piaget, personality arises from
 childhood, because the child encounters the world and integrates the information,
 who collects it in that confrontation. They build themselves up
 from their body, and the skills they practice with their body
 like grabbing, pointing, scratching,
 and all those things they can build. They build that up until they get to the point
 where they can start using abstractions. The baby starts at zero, with its exploration,
 absorbs information from the world, thus creating its personality.
 It is a beautiful model, and we will discuss that a little further.
 The depth psychologists. I mainly focus on Jung and Freud.
 If you take a college of personality theory, Freud is usually introduced first,
 and then Jung, and possibly Adler, and some neo-Freudians as one
 further elaboration in Freud. I don't think that's appropriate.
 I think you could argue that Jung ... that's the usefulness of Jung's theory
 is very evident when it comes to the great similarities between people.
 Jung was very biologically oriented. In a way, he was ahead
 biological psychiatrists and psychologists. Because when Jung formulated his theories,
 was one in the West, certainly in North America ... were most researchers
 those people studied behaviorists. And behaviorists assumed you
 was a blank page at birth, and that all you can do has been learned.
 That is not true at all.
 First, you cannot learn everything, because you must already know something
 to start the process. And second, you don't really have to
 learn what it means when a dog growls. That is, as it were, built-in.
 And you don't have to learn to be afraid of the dark.
 You can already do that on your third. There are many things that
 built into humans. We don't know exactly what that means.
 It seems that fear of snakes is innate, and even if it is
 is not congenital (which it probably is), you can very quickly acquire a snake phobia.
 While developing a gun phobia is very difficult.
 Jung was very interested in what I think can best be seen as
 the underlying structure of human cognition. Because people are a specific thing.
 It is not that our soul is separate from our body, and that our knowledge is somehow
 would be correct or universal. As if we could understand without a body.
 That's not how we work. We are physical. Our brains are developed
 for our body. Our mind is developed for our body, and so is our knowledge. That means that
 our cognitive abilities, our theories about the world, have underlying biological structures.
 Those are assumptions for our knowledge that we don't need to learn.
 You don't have to learn that being spanked hurts.
 You just discover that. You don't have to learn what a smile means. You don't really have to
 learn what anger means. You experience it. It is in you.
 Look at little children, babies, when they cry they are often angry.
 For example, a nine-month-old baby can roughly recognize its mother.
 Someone walks into the nursery, looks at the baby, and that is not the mother.
 And the baby starts to cry, and you think, "Poor baby."
 That baby is not sad, that baby is angry. You can see that when you look at the baby
 because he turns red, that's what happens to people when they cry because they are angry.
 That's good to know if you're arguing with someone and they get upset
 and starts to cry. You think, "Oh poor one." But if you look closely
 you can see that it is completely red. And that means he might want to strangle you, but
 hopefully his social side will keep him from doing that. That can be your attitude
 change towards him, or feel sorry for him when he feels hurt.

 People have all kinds of universal things, and Jung was
 very interested in what things they are, and how they manifest themselves in
 behavioral patterns. Imagine you have an instinct such as anger.
 That way you see it as a cross section, that person is angry.
 You can imagine the matching facial expression.
 But if you wanted to represent anger in a more complex way, you might represent it as a scenario,
 a story. Because that's what you want to know when someone gets angry, right? "What happened?"
 Imagine taking a thousand stories about angry people,
 and which would compress into one story, so that all the common elements of it
 all the stories of anger would be contained in one story. That would
 be the archetypal story of anger. And everyone would recognize it cause it's anger
 as in a movie, represented in its purest form. That's an archetype,
 and Jung was very interested in understanding and documenting it.
 And it is a lot of fun. One of the things we're going to do is
 watching movies. Probably "The Lion King," parts of it, and I will
 show how the archetypal structure manifests itself. And it is worth it.
 It's annoying because when you go to a movie you will think:
 "That's that archetypal structure," and "That symbol means that."
 You will be very annoying to your friends. But it is very entertaining and very enlightening.
 What's very cool about those archetypal story structures,
 they not only tell you who you are, but in a sense who you should be.

 That is cool. Because what modern people have problems with,
 is trying to understand whether life has meaning or not. We watch the world
 from a scientific perspective and say, "Seems like all this
 has no meaning. It has no universal meaning. "
 I think that is a silly conclusion, because the designers of the scientific method
 excluded subjective meaning at the beginning of the theory development.
 If you look at the world scientifically and say, "There is no subjective meaning" ...
 Yes, of course, because science was designed to have all subjective meaning
 was removed from the phenomena. That is not a thing
 to be surprised. Nor does that mean that there is no subjective meaning.
 It just means that it is very difficult to grasp from a purely scientific perspective.

 What's great about archetypal stories is that they put you on one
 universal way of telling who you are. And that's really cool.
 You also learn this at university. That's just to cry. You learn implicitly or explicitly
 in almost all research areas,
 especially in the human sciences, that morality is relative, and that there is no ultimate meaning.
 Which is a really terrible thing to teach people your age.
 Because you are too young to be nihilistic. You can be nihilistic when you're eighty-five
 then you are already done. But being nihilistic now is a catastrophe.
 It's pointless because the idea that things end up
 being meaningless is an extraordinarily simplistic philosophical theory.
 People do not benefit from that. It makes them sick. What you might consider is that
 if your stupid theory is making you sick, that there might be something wrong with it.
 That may be a criterion for the usefulness, and perhaps even the truth, of the theory.
 It depends on how you look at things. You can say, "If a truth makes you sick,
 that doesn't make it false. ”Maybe. But maybe it means
 that it is less true. That depends on what you mean by "truth."

 Jung is very useful for that. He is a terrifying thinker.
 When I was twenty-three or twenty-four, I had about everything for two years
 from Jung, about twenty-three volumes. I was upset there.
 I didn't understand what was going on. My dreams changed. It was intense.
 At the same time I read Nietzsche, which is equally bad. Nietzsche said
 that he philosophized with a hammer. That's great, unless he is
 using that hammer on your skull is not very pleasant.
 Jung is so different, and I think that's why you
 never learn anything about him in college. If you don't understand him
 he looks strange, and if you do understand him he is terrifying.
 You will stop and think, "Oh, never mind.
 I don't really need to know. "
 Freud. Freud is a nice piss for psychologists, which I find very sad,
 because it is ungrateful. Freud was really the one
 shaped the idea of ​​the unconscious. Everyone takes that for granted.
 And that there is a cognitive unconscious, which the psychologists discovered in the 1980s.
 "There is a cognitive unconscious." "Yes, good job guys.
 They had already discovered that in 1910. "But Freud is not recognized for it
 that discovery if you look at experimental psychology.
 As I said, that is quite ungrateful.
 Freud is a strange case. You may have problems with, especially with details
 from his theory. Like the Oedipus complex or penile envy, things like that.
 They seem laughably anachronistic.
 But sometimes someone can be mistaken in the details, and be right about the overall concept.
 Because theories are layered. Sometimes I read an essay
 of a student, and the sentences are awful. "Where did this person
 learn to write? ”“ Probably in high school somewhere. ”It's incomprehensible.
 But when you read it all, you think, "Yes, there is an idea in it."
 The person is more intelligent than his writing skills. And then you can say:
 "You write crappy, but you're pretty smart,
 and you have ideas, and if you could articulate them, they could be of high quality. "
 You can be wrong about the details and right about the overall concept.
 That was always the case with Freud.
 And Freud is unsurpassed when it comes to pathological family relationships. From Freud's perspective
 the basic task of the growing human being was to detach himself
 of his family. Then you might think, "Why is that such a problem?"
 There are a number of reasons for this. Your parents are taking care of you, maybe you don't want to
 don't lose too quickly. Especially if they take very good care of you.
 And that is the Oedipal situation from the Freudian perspective. The Oedipal situation arises
 if you have one parent, or two parents, who do so much for you
 then you are no longer able to do anything for yourself. And that's not a good thing
 it is particularly pathological. There is no one quite as striking as Freud
 who analyzes pathology. We're gonna watch a movie called "Crumb,"
 which is a very disturbing movie. That is a warning to those of you
 who are sensitive to it. It's a very disturbing documentary,
 but it shows Freudian psychopathology as you have never seen it before. Unless you're in
 a heavily Oedipal family lives.
 Well, I was not able to go through the entire overview. I will tell you briefly
 what is required of you, and we will continue with this in the next lesson.
 There are three tests: two intermediate tests and a final test. It will be multiple choice.
 I will make a number of questions available for the test so that you know what it will be like.
 I don't think they are particularly difficult, although some might disagree.
 We are expected to fit the numbers into a curve, remember that.
 You must be aware of this. You must write a 750-word essay.
 That's not very long, but that actually makes it even more difficult. The list for the topics
 for the essay is on the website. You can register there. There are twenty different topics,
 and fifteen places per topic. So I recommend that you do that quickly.
 You have to make an analysis of your personality, which is 7.5 percent of your grade.
 You can also find the link for this online. You can do that whenever you want.
 Your assistant, one of them, is Christine Brophy. She's standing there in the corner
 patiently waiting to be introduced. She works office hours, you can find that on the website. You can register
 for her, online. You can also register for my office hours, online.
 Well, that's half of the college outline. We'll see each other on Thursday.