I talked about what we're going to cover last time, but there I was
 not finished yet. So I'm going to finish that. For those who weren't there last time:
 you can view the lecture, because it is online. We stopped at the depth psychologists,
 that's the psychoanalysts. And the psychoanalysts are concerned with ...
 To a psychoanalyst you are, as it were, a collection of somewhat integrated minds.
 This is how you can see it as sub-personalities. You are not a unity.
 And those sub-personalities are anchored in ... in all kinds of things.
 They can arise from past experiences, especially from traumatic experiences. Or through socialization patterns that
 characteristic of your family. But they can also be rooted in basic biologicals
 motivation systems. For example, a psychoanalyst would conceptualize anger or sexual attraction as
 a subpersonality. And the reason for that is ... you know what's happening
 when you get angry. You get mad at someone you love
 and in a way you want to harm someone. You may just be arguing
 want to win, and bring the other down while doing that.
 But there is a desire that comes with anger. But many other things also happen.
 For example, if someone annoys you even though you love them,
 you will probably have easy access to all the memories you have at that point
 how annoying he is, and difficult to access the memories of
 how good he has been to you. You know that because sometimes you get angry
 on someone, and you have a discussion. And only later do you realize what is happening
 you come back to your senses, out of that possessed state, and you think, "Yes, I had
 didn't really take context into account, and I was kind of blunt. "
 Then you think, "Who's in charge?" And that is the question where the psychoanalysts
 are very interested in, and their answer is, "Not generally you."
 In a way, it is terrifying reading, because people like to think of themselves
 as the boss of their own house, so to speak, and that's only somewhat true.
 You know that, because at the turn of the year you have ... what are those things called?
 Good intentions. How you will improve yourself.
 One of the most common is: You will go to the gym three times a week.
 Not so. Very few people do that,
 because it is difficult, and people don't like to do difficult things.
 Because they are difficult, so that requires little explanation. But it also comes
 because you can't just tell yourself what to do. And that is annoying, because life
 would be much easier if you could just say, "Okay, sit down, study for two hours,
 don't watch cat videos on YouTube, or whatever you watch. "
 But no, it doesn't work like that. You sit there and study for a while,
 and then you start thinking about cats, and before you know it, you're off to haunted houses
 in London, or something like that. It's a scary idea because
 if you are not in charge of your own house ...
 If you're not completely in control of yourself, which is so
 what controls you then?
 And Freud is interesting in that regard, because he was talking about
 the driving force of fundamental motivation systems. For Freud these were mainly aggression and
 sexuality. And those are important drivers, make no mistake.
 He saw you as ... saw the conscious part of your personality ...
 like the captain of a ship with a very headstrong crew. That's a nice metaphor.
 For the ship is on the sea, and the sea can be very rough.
 You can only set a course, and then you have to deal with what happens.
 And the stubborn shipmen, those are your urges ... but you shouldn't see them as drifts.
 I like the psychoanalytic idea of ​​subpersonality because a subpersonality
 has a perspective. It wants things and has plans. It's a living entity,
 not a lifeless cognitive system. Freud was more interested in
 the biological foundation of the sub-personalities.
 Because he was highly biologically oriented and he realized sexuality and aggression
 were very basic sub-personalities.
 And then you have Jung, and Jung is far more terrifying than Freud. Which is telling,
 because Freud is pretty scary. But Jung is incredibly terrifying.
 According to Jung, the sub-personalities that make up you are thousands of years old.
 They are cultural constructions that are thousands of years old,
 and who have you in their grip. For example, Jung said,
 i don't remember where i love this phrase it's so accurate.
 You can think about it for five years, and still after that.
 Jung said, "People don't have ideas, ideas own people."
 That's something to think about, because think about your own situation.
 No doubt you have political ideas, and you think, "I have political ideas."
 No, not really, because you share those ideas with a lot of other people.
 So they are definitely not yours. And not only that, they have had a long historical development
 before you were there at all. They are grounded in
 the depth of your culture. And they have been elaborated extensively by
 one philosopher after another over the past two or three hundred years.
 There's that whole system of thought, and "poof!" it takes over your brain, and you think:
 "I have political ideas." Um, no, the political ideas own you.
 And that's a wholesome thought, because that's one of the ways of controlling your obsession
 to stop. Because people are constantly possessed by ideas.
 That's what happened in Nazi Germany, that's what happened in the Soviet Union.
 It happens all the time everywhere. You may think, "Possession is a bit strong." But that's not true.
 Obviously it is a metaphor, but it is one
 appropriate metaphor, for a collection of ideas, such as political ideas, are a living thing.
 They are not lifeless, dusty words on a bookshelf, somewhere. They are part of
 a dynamic society. And the driving force of those ideas motivates you. They have you
 in their grasp. You can tell when you talk to someone who is completely obsessed with
 an idea system, or an ideological system, because that is deadly boring.
 Unless you happen to believe the same. They will be some of their own
 ventilate fundamental axioms, and then you can see to which system they belong. And then they express
 only clichés, and can you predict everything they will say,
 if you know the axioms of the system. That is very inauthentic language.
 For example, someone like Rogers or Abraham Maslow, humanists would explain
 the sixties, talk about it. Because that person does not speak from the depth
 of his own experience, or his physical knowledge. He's just one
 mouthpiece for abstract ideas.
 It is very frightening to realize how much you can be the mouthpiece
 for abstract ideas. And that's one of the dangers of education
 especially in a mass system such as the university. Because what happens a lot
 when you go to university, you are presented with a number of preconceived ideas,
 so you can see it. And it is very easy to think that
 now your ideas are. That is not true. You have to earn a lot of ideas,
 and if it's a great idea, you really have to earn it. Why would you just
 adopt a great idea? It doesn't work like that. Things that are valuable
 you have to earn.
 Regardless, the depth psychologists are so good at that, it's a pleasure to read them.
 The problem with many of the people that we will discuss is that it is very difficult
 to summarize their work. Because the details are often very important.
 Take Piaget for example, the constructivist where we put it
 briefly mentioned. That man has written dozens of books, you can
 not really summarize. It is not one coherent theory that can be reduced to ten axioms,
 which you can read when flying from Toronto to Montreal, and "poof!"
 you are a piagetian psychologist. It doesn't work like that. The people who formulated these theories
 were very intelligent, and often very good writers.
 Much of the knowledge is in how they write, not what you can get out of it.
 With most theorists, Freud, with Jung it is more difficult,
 but with Freud, Rogers, such people ... You can distil the most important thing from their theories,
 then you can make a stereotype or caricature of it,
 and you can point out that that caricature is absurd, and then you can, you get smarter
 then feel Freud. But you are not. So that's not a good idea.
 These people should be treated with respect because they have so much to tell you.
 It's so useful.
 All right, we've been talking about the depth psychologists, and we've been talking about the constructivists.
 We have not yet talked about the humanists and the existentialists and the phenomenologists.
 Those are a lot of difficult words, so let's build a foundation for it.
 To be a humanist means to be a child of the Enlightenment.
 Humanistic ideas, at least that is how the humanists see it,
 is "post-religious." According to them, it places humanistic ideas
 the value of man at the center of the world. Appreciate a person
 as he is, and also appreciate how he could be. And promoting the ways
 of development that enables humans to become what they could be, as creatures
 which are valuable as such. For example, a humanist would be skeptical of claims ...
 let's say Christian assertions, and I use that example because it is the domain of ideas
 where these thinkers appeared was almost always Judeo-Christian.
 The background of their ideas is formed by those systems, and you cannot understand their thinking,
 without understanding it. In part, humanism was a rebellion against the idea of ​​life on Earth
 had only limited value, because the important things only
 after death would take place in the afterlife. "No, it's about the here and now.
 The present moment is important. This life is important.
 And you don't need an afterlife, or the belief in a transcendent reality,
 to find value in the here and now. "Good. That idea has a lot
 good aspects.
 The idea that you can improve yourself is, in a sense, a humanistic idea.
 How many of you believe you can improve yourself? Is there anyone
 who doesn't believe that? And would like to admit that? Usually people don't believe that
 if they are very depressed or desperate. But it cannot be taken for granted.
 In many cultures, in medieval Europe for example,
 you were, as it were, stuck in your position, there was not really an idea
 of self-improvement. You could try not to sin, but you wouldn't get radically better
 in one way or another. You were just who you were, and that was it. But the humanists see it differently.

 The existentialists are a special type of thinkers.
 When Freud talks about psychopathology, because a lot of personality theory is about pathology,
 how personalities develop wrong ... Freud sees the normal person
 as healthy, but he can turn into a pathological version of himself
 from past trauma. Often this is due to abuse in childhood,
 or perhaps through childhood sexual abuse. Freud talked about that a lot,
 and it is common. According to Freud, if you were not well,
 then that had a cause. Something terrible had happened to you
 you had to learn to deal with that, in whatever way,
 put yourself in order, and then you could go on as a healthy person.
 But the existentialists think very differently. They think that every normal person
 is pathological. They think so because they exist self-consciously,
 the life of a creature that knows its limits in time and space,
 its vulnerability to illness and death, and the loss of things
 what he loves, and the disintegration of all things in a sense ... That's problematic enough,
 to have problems without being abused.
 The existentialists see life as such as a serious enough problem
 to destabilize you mentally just by being aware of it.
 And they think that is why people often have their own consciousness
 flee. How do you deal with the fact that life is suffering?
 By not thinking about it. That is not a good answer for an existentialist.
 And in general, that's not a good answer for clinical psychologists, either.
 The literature very strongly suggests that the harder you run from something,
 what you fear, the bigger it gets, and the faster it chases you.
 Avoidance is generally a very bad strategy. That's not always the case
 because sometimes you can't change anything, you really can't.
 Then it makes no sense to spend a lot of time on anticipation and resistance.
 And sometimes people really find themselves in hopeless situations, but often not.
 I like the existentialists. I think their ... basically all the people we'll be talking about ...
 their ideas are extremely valuable. It helps you position yourself
 in your own life. It clarifies your relationship with other people and the world.
 It helps you shape the future, as it could be. If you were
 who you can be. That's very beautiful.
 The phenomenologists are a complicated group. The fundamental phenomenologist was Martin Heidegger,
 which was also somewhat associated with the Nazis, which of course
 was not a good thing. People argue about whether you are philosophy
 apart from his affiliation with the Nazis, and I think that is possible.
 Heidegger wanted to re-examine the nature of reality. Heidegger's idea was
 that we had made a fundamental philosophical mistake in ancient Greek times.
 That we started to focus on the wrong elements of ... he doesn't mention it
 reality, he calls it "being." A phenomenologist is someone who is concerned with being.
 You may think, "What's the difference between being and reality?"
 The answer is that it depends on how you define "being" and how you define "reality".
 Heidegger's observation was the reality for modern people
 is a kind of lifeless, material, objective substrate. It's essentially dead, so to speak,
 and most real things are like that. You can see that as
 objective reality. But Heidegger pointed out that that is a choice,
 in a way. Because your knowledge is limited, and because you are fundamentally ignorant
 about all things, you must decide that some things are true, and then based on that
 to trade. And Heidegger's point was: there are many things about it
 you decide on an axiomatic level. One of the things about it
 you can decide, for example, is whether the objective world is more real,
 or that your lived experience is more real.
 You may think, "What's the difference?" I would say:
 "The difference is like seeing someone hurt in a movie, or being hurt themselves."
 Pain is a great example of an element of being because it is obvious ... because you
 experiences it within your own ... it is difficult to explain because he uses different terminology.
 Pain is an element of your existence. It's not something ... the pain as such
 you cannot conceptualize in objective terms. You can measure it.
 Maybe your heart rate speeds up when you are in pain or something like that.
 Whether your facial expression changes. You can schedule it, but the schedules are slightly different
 than the phenomenon. Hence the term "phenomenology." The phenomenologists have
 built a complete thinking system, based on the axiom that is the best way to
 to approach life is to assume that being is the basic reality, rather than
 the objective as the fundamental level.
 You may think, "Why are people concerned with that?"
 Partly because ... this is an existentialist thesis: one consequence
 of developing the objective theory of existence is incredible technology
 that surrounds us. And thank goodness for that, otherwise we would be out in the
 freezing cold. But one of the consequences was that when humans determined objective reality,
 and that defined as the ultimate reality, there were terrible questions about the meaning of it
 life arose. If the world consists of nothing but dead matter,
 is endless, and we are nothing but a flickering light in the wind, then the thought creeps over you
 that all the suffering may not be worth it. In other words:
 does your life really have meaning, or is that an illusion?
 Heidegger would say you have that problem because you have the issue
 wrong approach. Obviously things have meaning. Only not if you
 the hypothesis assumes that the objective is ultimate reality, and everything else is only secondary.
 It's complicated, it takes a while to understand.
 The humanists, existentialists and to some extent the phenomenologists,
 all came from ... there were different sources for their thinking, and I would say one of them
 the conflict is between religion and science, or between value and objective truth.
 They are trying to reconsider that divorce. And Piaget also tried to do something like that.
 And also Jung, I think. Another aspect is that many existentialists
 and humanists worked after World War II. After World War II took place,
 with all its horrors, people who thought about human nature were, of course
 very interested in how such a thing could happen. Existentialism, at least if
 a psychological school, came about in part as a response to the horrors of the Second World War.
 It is a very serious form of psychology, and is characteristic of thinking in the fifties,
 before the hippies came and made everything sweet and light.
 That's more where you can put Rogers and Maslow.
 We'll talk about that pretty extensively, those three categories.
 It's a bit of a strange approach in this lecture series because I'll be talking about
 a number of psychologists from that period, but the other people I will mainly discuss,
 are not actually psychologists ... it depends on what you mean by "psychologists."
 I'm talking a lot about Nietzsche and Dostoevksi, as well as a Russian writer
 Alexander Solzhenitsyn, who wrote a book entitled "The Gulag Archipelago", which is one of the ...
 There were a number of important events that brought down the Soviet Union's totalitarian system,
 and you can argue which ones they were, but no doubt one of them was Solzhenitsyns
 publication of "De Gulag Archipel." That's a 2700 page book,
 that describes what it was like to live there, and how many people died.
 It's a glowing book. He won a Nobel Prize and he deserved it.
 Solzhenitsyn, someone remarkable. He is the Dostoevsky of the twentieth century,
 and that means something. And Dostoevsky is someone else that I use a lot in that part.
 Dostoevsky and Nietzsche essentially saw themselves as psychologists.
 It's strange because when you think about scientists,
 you usually think of people doing experiments, right? But one of the things ...
 you will notice this when you think about it, for many of you have enough
 attended lectures on science. And a lot of what they teach you
 if they teach you scientific research is how to set up a good experiment,
 with a correct methodology, a correct analysis, how the results
 structure well in a scientific format, how to test a hypothesis.
 But what you never teach them is how you do at all
 comes to the hypothesis. Because at least that is
 half the problem, and probably more than half.
 As a scientist, you also have to be able to come up with hypotheses, and not just test them.
 You may need both to be a true scientist, but you may not. Maybe you can go alone
 come up with extraordinary hypotheses, and it is certainly the case that people like Dostoevsky and Nietzsche
 could come up with incredible hypotheses.
 Their ideas are in many ways fundamental to the entire development of thought ...
 for the type of thinking you will find in college. Their ideas
 is fundamental to the entire development of both the scientific and the non-scientific
 ideas of the entire twentieth century. So it's very entertaining to
 to descend into it, and look at the roots of things like this.
 Because that's how you find out how things are connected, and why, and how they developed,
 and what that means. What it means when you have those ideas and why you have them
 and what role they play in your life.
 Okay, so after that ... that's true
 the clinical and philosophical part of the course ends. I am a clinical psychologist,
 and most of the leading personality theorists were clinical psychologists.
 That is why the first part of the lecture is philosophical.
 Because clinical psychologists, psychiatrists, and doctors
 are not really scientists, they are more like engineers.
 What an engineer wants to do ... an engineer might be using scientific knowledge, fine,
 very well. But what he actually wants to do is change something.
 He wants to make something, he wants to transform something. He wants to act in a way that is useful.
 The same is true for the domain of health.
 Someone comes to you with a psychological problem. What you want to do then
 is to make it better. And "better" is not a scientific category. So if you ...
 you can say, "It's scientific because worse means" abnormal. "
 That is not true. You can say that, but it is superficial. Because it often happens
 that you don't normally see as healthy. You see extraordinary as healthy.
 Or you may see extraordinary as desirable, and desirable may be even better than healthy.

 You cannot avoid the domain of values ​​when you try to interact with people,
 and put their lives in order. Because what you always ask is, "What's going on?"
 "What is it?" "Why are you dissatisfied?" "Why are you suffering?"
 "Why aren't you productive?" "Why do you compete with everyone?"
 "Why can't you sleep?" "Why do you wake up screaming?"
 "Why can't you pursue anything that would benefit you?" "Why are you hurting everyone you know?"
 Those are ethical questions. And then the following problem is:
 "What are we going to do about it?" "What do you want?" "What would you like your life to be like
 if it were up to you? "And then," How do we get there
 from where you are now to there? ”And these are all architectural questions,
 but above all they are ethical questions, because it is about how to act.
 I don't want to leave that unnoticed. Because that usually happens.
 Doctors, clinical psychologists and psychiatrists (even if they are doctors),
 they think what they are doing is science, but it is not.
 They are informed by science, but it is not the same. That certainly applies to doctors,
 they are not even trained to be scientists.
 Enough about that. The next part of the lecture, the second half,
 focuses on two elements of personality theory, more modern elements, although not necessarily
 more valuable. In part, it will be very neurobiological, because we
 have made a lot of progress, over the past hundred years, when it comes to understanding the structure
 and brain function. The things we don't know about the brain ...
 We don't understand many things about the brain. For example, we have no idea
 what the relationship is with consciousness, except that the brain is needed.
 And you can even challenge that somewhat, because there are known cases
 of people born with hydrocephalus, that means your skull is filling
 with moisture. The most famous case was a Frenchman who got an MRI scan
 because of one thing or another (it had nothing to do with what was eventually discovered),
 but he only had five percent of his cortical brain tissue. His whole head was filled with
 cerebrospinal fluid, and his brain was a kind of membrane along the sides,
 like a balloon. And as far as they could see it, it was nothing wrong with him.
 "Hm, interesting. What is the rest of that brain for then?"
 And then there's the matter of ... I don't know if you've ever heard of ...
 I don't remember her name, I think it's Pepper. She had a famous red-tailed parrot.
 You can look it up: "Talking African Gray Parrot." And that parrot
 could talk like a four-year-old. Better than any chimpanzee. Complete sentences,
 he seemed to understand what he was doing. It's a parrot, its brain is so big.
 How is that possible?
 There are many things we don't know about the brain. They are incredibly complex.
 But we have discovered many interesting things.
 We understand where the fundamental networks for reward, pain and fear are.
 This is important. As if you were discovering important continents.
 We understand to some extent how people learn, and under what conditions,
 and we understand to some extent what the basic motivations and emotions are.
 Those are not scientific categories, motivations and emotions. Those are linguistic categories.
 But we have to make do with it. We know quite a bit about their underlying neurobiological basis,
 and I want to discuss that in some detail, for several reasons.
 Partly because it provides a nice scientific basis for many of the hypotheses
 and assumptions of the psychoanalysts. For example, Freud had the hypothesis
 of the existence of the id. There's no id in your brain, but it doesn't matter
 because the id, the idea of ​​the id, is a functional category, an instrument as it were.
 But there are many "id-like" structures in your brain, such as in particular
 the hypothalamus, and that thing ... People like to think that
 their impressive cortex is what controls everything, but your hypothalamus,
 a very little thing above your spinal cord,
 that's what's in charge. As long as you're not hungry or angry or not
 chasing sexual arousal, you don't gamble and you're not addicted as long as you
 are fully fed, and feel warm and comfortable, you can think, and you are in control.
 But as soon as any of that goes wrong, the subcortical systems take over.
 You can see that in conditions such as anorexia.
 You can think of anorexia as a war between the cortex and the hypothalamus.
 The cortex only wins if the anorexic patient dies.
 Beyond that, it's the hypothalamus that always wins, and that's why anorexic patients
 can't control their binge eating. They lose weight to their weight
 75 percent is what it should be, which is difficult.
 It's not easy to starve yourself like that. But they keep having binges
 and eat three liters of ice cream, and two sacks of bread. And they can't stop themselves
 because your hypothalamus would rather not have you dead.
 So if you're not paying attention, if you're not in shape, or if you might
 recently been hurt, giving your energy, or the negative
 emotion has disturbed your cognitive abilities, the hypothalamus will kick in,
 grab you and say "you're hungry" and off you go, to the fridge.
 At two in the morning you will empty that fridge in a kind of daze.
 And then you come to your senses, and you think, "What the hell was that?"
 That's the id, and that's not a trivial thing.
 And that's a good thing, because if he wasn't constantly telling you what to do ...
 think about how silly you are. If you had to breathe voluntarily, how many days do you think
 you would survive? You wake up and an hour later you forget to breathe
 and then you're dead. Your brain won't let you do anything important
 they all take care of that in the background, because you're just not smart enough.
 You don't know how to digest things, for example. In fact you don't know
 how you walk, even if you do. There are fundamental subsystems, and some are not even aware,
 strangely, although they are neurological, and they do all the work.
 And your cortex rides, in a way.
 And he thinks he's in control, but no, not really.
 We are going to spend quite a bit of time on the basic brain structures,
 and the functions of those structures, because I love functional neuroanatomy.
 Not only do I want to know what the brain consists of, but I also want to know what the parts do.
 There we have difficult reading. Swanson, that's a hard part
 and Gray's piece. Those papers were written by genius neuropsychologists.
 They have put their entire life's work in a paper.
 You will read it and think, "Oops, this is difficult."
 Yes, it took a genius thirty years to write it, so it will be difficult.
 But it's so informative, it's worth it, if you want to take on that struggle.

 That's the biological side, then there is the psychometric side. And psychometrics is
 a very unpopular domain within psychology, even among psychologists.
 That's because psychometricians have actually discovered things, and people hate them
 what they discovered. And no wonder. They were psychometricians, engineers in fact,
 who became involved in psychology and discovered intelligence. Technical, psychometric intelligence.
 I.Q. People will tell you that there are many types of intelligence. That is not true.
 That is incorrect. Because of the following: the statistics that psychologists use,
 were invented by the people who discovered IQ. That means all that
 what psychologists have ever claimed, and that has been statistically verified,
 verified in the same way as IQ. So you can't say
 "IQ is invalid," without saying that all psychology, as well as other domains,
 are also invalid because they use the same method.
 And it's worse because the relationship between IQ and success is much stronger than
 the relationship between almost all psychological phenomena and whatever.
 For example with you, even though you are all very above average intelligent,
 because otherwise you wouldn't be here, at least above 85 percent ...
 That's something to think about, because much of it is biologically determined,
 so for a large part you are here
 because you won the genetic lottery. Hooray for you. And nobody has it
 spoiled too much during your upbringing. But even with you is the correlation between
 your intelligence and your average grade are quite high, even if it is
 a limited sample, because you are all pretty smart. And even though there are many errors in it
 the rating system, because it not only measures intelligence,
 even then it is quite strong. When you measure conscientiousness and other elements
 of personality, what you can do statistically, will be ten percent of people in twenty years
 in this room with the highest IQ, have the highest income, almost certainly.
 Unless something terrible happens to them. You can overcome that
 to some extent, if you work very hard. That is conscientiousness.
 But that is also a characteristic that seems to have a rather strong biological basis.
 Because of those things people hate psychometricians,
 for they discover facts, facts that are very unpleasant.
 I can give an example. You all have an IQ above 115.
 100 is as smart as an average high school graduate.
 115 is the lower limit to get by at a good university, as it were. With 115 you still will
 have enough hassle, you will have to work hard.
 Well, 115 is a standard deviation above the mean. A standard deviation below
 the average is 85. There are just as many people in the world
 who have an IQ of 85 as people who can go to college. Then you think:
 "What can you do with an IQ of 85?" This is an answer ... the United States military
 has conducted psychometric testing for over a hundred years, for a variety of reasons,
 but they have done a lot of basic science. The army of
 the United States likes to have recruits. Understandable, because would you be anywhere
 Want to be sent to be shot? Probably not.
 People don't line up for the military. Even outside of wartime
 it's hard to get people. The Americans have used the military ...
 imagine having an underclass, of people who are not doing very well, what you have in every society,
 and you want to raise some of them into some sort of middle class.
 You can do that quite effectively by enlisting young men into the army,
 where they get training, and discipline, and maybe
 they can rise to the middle class. So there are many policy reasons
 1) why the US military wants people, and 2) to serve in the military,
 but also for social reasons. Positive social reasons. So the chances are slim
 that they refuse you. One hundred years of IQ testing was the result of the introduction of
 a law in the United States: you cannot enlist someone in the military
 if he has an IQ of less than 82. That's 10 percent of the population.
 Think about that. That means that one in ten people is unable to contribute something of value,
 in an organization that is complex, but no more complex than other organizations,
 who is desperately looking for people. They cannot offer anything that makes a positive contribution.
 The military is worse off with them than without them.
 It's a terrible thing to say so, but it's a terrible statistic. But it also means ...
 if you see the military as more or less similar to the world in a sense,
 in terms of complexity, that means there is 10 percent of the population
 who cannot really live well in a complex cognitive society. And you might say:
 "Something needs to be done about that." Yes, good luck.
 People have been trying to do something about it for a long time.
 Billions, maybe even trillions of dollars have been spent trying to achieve cognitive enhancement
 in the United States. Besides the fact that we have an education system,
 with the aim of making people smarter.
 We will talk a lot about psychometrics, and the psychometricians
 are in fact merciless statisticians. In a way they are a-theoretical.
 They use the computer and advanced statistical techniques,
 to view large collections of data and to distil patterns from them. I hated the "Big Five"
 when I first came across it. I thought, "My God, how boring."
 It has no underlying theory, it is not prescriptive, it is not interesting in a literary way,
 it doesn't have a good story, it's so dry.
 But it works, and that's the way it is. So we are going to spend a lot of time on psychometrics.
 And my lab has done quite a bit of work over the past ten years to
 further develop the Big Five model. What we will discuss, among other things, is the "Big Ten" model,
 and that divides each of the five characteristics into two aspects, so to speak.
 Those are quite interesting. They predict political beliefs quite well.
 Conservatives tend to be more orderly, which is part of conscientiousness,
 and less creative, less open. And progressives tend to be more open and less conscientious.
 A cynic would say, "That's why they support income leveling, because they don't work."
 Conservatives work like crazy, and the progressives say:
 "Give me some of that money" and "The system is unfair."
 And the conservatives say, "No, we've worked hard, and we're not giving you anything."
 They both have flawed theories. Progressives, by the way, are good entrepreneurs.
 Wait, let me rephrase that. Most entrepreneurs are politically progressive,
 because they score high on openness. It seems to be that
 progressive people start businesses, and conservative people lead businesses. So they need each other.
 Since progressives are open, they are already working on the next idea.
 They don't want to bother with the details, they find that soporific.
 They are not very orderly. But once you set up a process,
 and it works, you need someone to keep it functioning.
 That is not interesting if you have a creative personality.
 Well, that's it. That's the college. How much time do we have?
 I think I'm gonna tell you a story now
 and you will think it has nothing to do with what we discussed
 but that does not matter. I've picked out this strange picture.
 It is a picture of Jonas, a biblical figure. That story is 2,500 years old, so it's quite an old story.
 And usually when a story is 2,500 years old, it is much older than that.
 It happened to be written down 2,500 years ago, but at that time
 there were no novels and books, you didn't have fifty different stories at your fingertips.
 There were a few stories that everyone knew, and who knows how long they had been around
 but that was a very long time. So it was written 2,500 years ago,
 but we actually have no idea how old it is. In a way it is
 almost immeasurably old, at least by human understanding. You see this image, and what you see
 is this thing ... what would you call it? It's a medieval version of a whale.
 And you might think, "That's not what a whale looks like,"
 and that's true in a sense, but a medieval whale was not
 what we mean by whale. Whale in the Middle Ages meant "big, terrifying, underwater case."
 Maybe a huge squid was a "whale," a whale was a "whale,"
 a shark was a "whale," the category is different.
 Because of this, and because of ignorance, the mythological representation looks so strange.
 It's still a representation of something, but it's a bit generalized.
 He spits out Jonas on dry land. And you think, "That's kind of strange."

 How many of you have seen Pinocchio? Pretty much. How many not?
 Really? You haven't seen Pinocchio? What kind of parents did you have !?

 You remember that in Pinocchio, Pinocchio's father is locked up in a whale.
 And Pinocchio has to go into the depths to save him. And what you did not notice
 when you watched Pinocchio is how strange that is. You're watching
 to a doll that descends into the sea to rescue its father from a whale.
 And you think, "Yeah, logically."

 That is interesting. Why does that make sense?
 Why does that make sense? Because it doesn't make sense.
 That's a good example of the power of an archetypal idea. Because an archetypal idea
 is a very deep and old idea, which you find understandable, even if someone points it out to you
 that you believe that, what you do when you watch a movie, you think:
 "It's weird that I believe that." And that's not doll
 who descends into the sea to rescue his father from a whale. So that you know.
 It is a drawing of a doll descending into the sea to save his father
 from a whale. It is outside of reality in many ways. But what's interesting,
 is that if you go to the movies to watch something like that, and someone taps your shoulder,
 and say, "Do you know what you're doing?" then you say, "Shut up,
 and let me watch the movie. "

 You don't notice, "Oh yes, I'm very odd. It's very strange
 how I'm watching this, not noticing how peculiar I am. "
 That's why I'm going to tell you this story, because it's true, even though
 is it not true.
 That is a strange thing. I had a very strange professor at the University of Alberta.
 He died a few years ago. He took a bus I think in Winnipeg
 and he never got out again, and no one ever saw him again. He had been a prison psychologist.
 He worked in a very high-security prison and at the University of Alberta. So who knows ...
 maybe he ran into one of his old clients. But it is very strange, a strange ending.
 We talked about fiction, and he said:
 "Fiction is a lie that can tell you the truth." That's an interesting way of seeing it.
 Because you read fiction, and it is true. But that's not it,
 because it is not about something that actually happened.
 But it is more than that because if it is good fiction it is about a collection of things
 that have taken place in a similar way. It's a distillation. Like when someone
 you tell a long story, and you talk about it with your partner and he asks:
 "What was that about?" And you tell in two sentences what it was about.
 You bring it back to the core. And a very good story is at the heart of something.
 And some of the very old stories, the very strange ones like Jonah and the whale for example,
 told in a certain way in the story of Pinocchio, are at the heart of many things,
 and people have distilled those stories for a very long time.
 Thousands of people for thousands of years,
 that tell these strange stories, that people remember. And people think, "They are true."
 Yes, they are true, but not in the way of a science story
 where is. It's a different type of "true."
 This is the story of Jonas. It's an old Jewish story. It probably also says
 a variant of the Quran, but I don't know it, and maybe there isn't one.
 Jonas lives in 500 BC. and God says to him:
 “Jonas, there is a city called Nineveh, and the people do not walk there
 the right way, and things will soon go all wrong,
 if no one does anything about it. So I think you should go to Nineveh
 and tell the king and the people,
 that they don't live well. ”And Jonas, with his good mind, says:
 "You want me to go to a city and the king, such an authoritarian figure
 with absolute power over everything, tell that there is something wrong with what he does,
 and that all his subjects are evil? You want me to do that? ”And Jonas says:
 "I don't think so," because he's a smart guy. So he runs away
 and goes to a village, and he goes on a boat,
 a large boat with fishermen. And they will take him to a place where
 God can't find him, which isn't easy. But of course God cannot
 be fooled by such pitiful strategies, as he is omniscient
 and things like that.
 Jonas is on the water, with the fishermen,
 and God is calling a great storm. And the fishermen panic because
 the boat will capsize and they will all perish, and they are not happy about that.
 So they decide to throw everything overboard, so that the boat becomes lighter.
 But that does not help, because the storm is getting worse. And then they all start to pray.
 They all have different gods, it is a small god competition.
 One fisherman prays to one god, and the other fisherman prays to another god, but nothing happens.
 Jonas happens to be sleeping in the ship's hold. He has already told you that
 he's on the run from his god, so they think, "Let's wake up Jonas,
 because maybe he's responsible for these troubles. ”So they go down,
 wake him up and ask for his god. And he says:
 "My God made the heavens and the earth." And their gods didn't do so much spectacular,
 so they were quite upset. They say to Jonas:
 "Why are you running from that figure? That's not a good idea." And Jonas says:
 "Yes, I'm sure it's my fault that this storm has come,
 So throw me overboard. "And they say," We can't do that,
 you shouldn't run but you're not a murderer or anything
 we can't just throw you overboard. ”So they're trying to get to shore, but God won't allow that.
 He intensifies the storm until the fishermen finally say:
 "You know what? There you go!" And that's no problem for Jonas, because he knows he is
 is a bad guy. And a whale swallows him. Then you think: "That probably isn't right.
 First, if a whale swallowed you, you'd be dead. ”And it was probably a shark.
 You won't thrive there.
 It is not a big cave, like in the whale in Pinocchio. It's dense and there's no oxygen
 so you're dead. But that's not what's happening. Jonas is in the whale,
 he's kind of upset, because he's in a whale, in a storm, and God is mad at him.
 So the first thing he does is pray and tell God he's an idiot
 and that he would like to be forgiven. Then the whale swims to shore and
 spits him out on the beach, a very inelegant way to arrive.

 So that's Jonas's story. And then he gets up and thinks:
 "Yeah, that wasn't that good. It was pretty bad.
 Maybe I'll just go to Nineveh and tell those people that they are
 don't live well, because that is better than making God angry.
 Because of the storm, the fishermen, and the whale, and all that. "
 And he goes to Nineveh, tells them what's going on, and it seems to work.
 That's an interesting story, and you think, "How could people
 believe that? ”You might ask,“ Do you believe that story? ”
 And you think, "No," but then you think, "Maybe that's a more complex question
 than you might think, because it turned out that I believed the story about Pinocchio. "
 And you say, "No, I didn't really believe it." Then I would say
 "It depends what you mean by 'believe.'" Cause you looked at it,
 and as you watched it grabbed you, you understood, you didn't want to
 be disturbed, you followed it. So did you believe it? No, you were one
 four-year-old skeptic, who thought, "Pop, whale ... no, that's not right."
 You are not like that, you believe in it, because you are gripped by it.
 And if someone taps your shoulder and wakes you up thirty or twenty years later
 then you say, "No, I don't believe that." Do you know,
 it is remarkable what you all believe.
 How many of you are fans of Star Wars? You dare not admit it.


 But it must be many. I know that. That's all mythology.
 It's all mythology. You know that the person who ... what's his name?
 The man who invented Star Wars, Lucas. Lucas was a student of Joseph Campbell.
 Joseph Campbell was a psychologist / mythologist, and the Star Wars stories are modern mythology.
 Just like Harry Potter, and everything else that fires the imagination.
 You bet you believe it. And with good reason. What time is it?
 We stop here. I'll tell you the reason next time we see each other.
