We all know that factory farms areterrible but what about eating animals
that come from free range farms or from hunting?
If all we succeeded at wasstopping the factory farms I'd be so
happy. Because an animal that is
living in a natural environment andreally getting to experience its
sovereignty and its direction of itslife and then gets killed hopefully quickly,
it's a radically different experiencethan an animal
that is really enslaved and enslaved
in poor to terrible to atrociousconditions for its whole life and then killed in
very often a very brutal way. Ifwe only made that shift that would be so
humongous. So much of the atrocitywould be addressed.
Then the question comes, is that the onlyshift worth making?
Is that all the shift? For me as much respect as I have for
the Native American kind of ethic, Ialso notice that
in areas where there was more
pre-agriculture, in areas where there wasmore natural edible plant life,
there was less animal consumption. And inareas where there is less natural, edible
plant life there was more animalconsumption because that's what the people had to
do to adapt and live there.
We totally understand. Post-agriculture, were we have the ability to grow
everything we need plant-wise, then
if that produces less suffering,
less less harm than killing moresentient creatures,
then is there really a justification forcontinuing the animal thing? For me there isn't.
We talk about the idea of humaneslaughter
and it really is an oxymoron and all youhave to do to recognize that is ask, 
would you be okay being on the otherside of it?
In morality there's a famous test 
called the pie slice theorem. 
Is something really ethical, issomething fair? It's like
you slice the pie, you pick what the two sides are,
and I get to pick which one
 I want, or I slice and you pick, but that way we avoid bias.
We need to ask, are we setting up a dynamic for how we
tend to animals where we would be okay being in their position and if the answer is no, 
I wouldn't want to live for I wastaken care of pretty well
and then murdered quickly, then theanswer is they wouldn't want that either
and if it was necessary then we have tolook at justifying it but if it's not
necessary there's really nojustification for it.
That really is the key, to get
is that no animal has ever voluntarilybut their head on the chopping block and
if they knew that was coming would doeverything in their power to get away from it
and just because we have the power totake their life away do we have the right?
And if we need to,
you know if there's a situation where weare in a survival situation, we have no
other resources and we're going to die or they're going to die, 
it's a totally different story. If someone really didn't know how to be
healthy otherwise it's a different story.
But if it's simply a preference for usbut it's
the whole possibility for life for them them,
then I don't think we can ethically justify that.
I think it's something that you find consistent through all forms of life,
from the most complex to the most basic, is that every
animal wants to live, at the end of theday
there isn't any animal that doesn't wantit
to have placed and to experience lifewhat its
it's a fundamental impulse apply forbiology is to continue writing to
propagate in
I'm and we think about are
desires everything we wanted everythingwe don't want to talk contingent
upon life right and without thateverything else is gone so
it is Adam other their children and tobe social and two
experience anything that one experienceis
on the foundation of their ability tolive in such take that away
for just I like the way it tastes rightor something that is
so surface in our hierarchy of needs
and it's at the core at their hierarchyof needs means that we have to make
their life so unimportant in our eyes
did their whole right to life is worthless than something
relatively trivial to us and if we'rewilling to take another feeling life
forms and me make
their whole experience that trivial thenthere's a bleed over affect where we
start doing that with other people
right we start doing that with anythingelse we start thinking of
the restive life as a commodity for usrather than
other sovereign life under their ownright to life we're not thinking about
what is it what is it what does it feelwhat is a trait like how can I support
it having a full life experience in thisuniverse it's
what is in it for me and even if itrequires harming it hurting it how can I
get what I want out of it
we start thinking that way in the areait leads to way of thinking that leads
over
to commoditized in all life we can seethat being like an
underlying way and bean
for all the problems in the world rightnow