Okay, so we divided up the brain one way.
Now we’re going to divide it up anotherway, so this is the brain from the top down.
You know you have two hemispheres and youmight think, “well why do you need two hemispheres?”
Do know that Gazzaniga, who’s a relativelyfamous neuropsychologist, studied split-brain
patients.
You know that your cortical hemispheres – yourbrain is united down in the sub-cortical areas.
It’s sort of stuck together, although youhave twins of many of the sub-cortical structures.
You have two hippoc8ampi and two amygdalafor example – one on each side.
At the top, the hemispheres are quite separate,but they’re connected by the corpus callosum,
which makes them communicate.
It’s kind of interesting because you wonderwhy they aren’t all glued together.
What it seems to indicate is that there’ssome utility of functional independence, combined
with some utility of communication.
So it might be like, “do you really wantto be networked at the same time to everyone
in the world?”
No you don’t, you want some narrow pathwayso that only the important information comes
through.
So it’s sort of like, maybe the right hemisphere’sthe one kind of computational device, and
the left hemisphere is another kind of computationaldevice – of course they’re not computational
devices, but you get the point.
Only the important information – the processedinformation from the right hemisphere goes
across.
And only the processed information from theleft hemisphere goes across.
Something like that, whatever.
If you have someone who’s epileptic or thathas a brain illness of some sort, it’s usually
epilepsy but not always, and you do surgeryon them and cut the corpus callosum; what
you find, weirdly enough, is that each hemispheredevelops its own personality.
This is other evidence, I would say, for theidea that what the brain does is produce personalities.
You can keep paring the brain down, and whatit’s going to do is produce lower and lower
resolution personalities all the way downto the bottom – they’re just not as detailed.
If you lost, say eighty percent of your cortexrandomly, you’d sort of being like a thumbnail
of yourself.
So, you’d still be you, just not at thesame detail.
Here’s an interesting idea from the Catholics,it kind of goes along with the avatar idea.
So the Catholics had been wrestling for along time with the question of how God could
have fit himself in a human body– becauseyou could imagine that could obsess Christians
– this great, big God in an itty-bitty body,but God in there just bursts the boundaries.
They have this idea called Kenosis, whichmeans emptying.
The idea is that God had to empty himselfout before he could inhabit a human body,
and it’s very much like a thumbnail idea.
Jung would have of course thought exactly,that the self was a thumbnail of God.
He wouldn’t put it that way, but definitelythat’s where his thinking was leading.
So that’s a pretty damn cool idea.
Anyways, so I developed this before I readwhat I’m going to tell you, but it doesn’t
matter.
I’m going to talk about it from anothertheorist’s point of view.
The guy I’m going to tell you about, hisname is Elkhonon Goldberg.
He’s a neuropsychologist, and he was oneof Luria’s students who ended up in New
York.
Goldberg was obviously influenced by Luriaand all the unknown, Grey, and all those people
that I’ve already talked to you about.
He was interested in why you have two hemispheres.
Well, there’s a bunch of things you cansay, broadly speaking about the hemispheres,
and I’ve written some of them down there.
The right hemisphere – this is an idealizedrepresentation of a relatively highly lateralized
right-handed male.
The reason I’m saying that is men seem tobe more lateralized than women, and the right-handed
lateralization is the standard kind.
The brain can be lateralized all sorts ofways.
What you might say is that – there’s abunch of ways of looking at it.
One way you can look at it is that your cortexgets colonized by underlying structures.
Each underlying structure is likely to colonizea particular area.
For example, when you are born and you wakeup and you see, your eyes are going to colonize
your visual cortex most likely.
It’s sort of adapted for that.
If you don’t have a visual cortex then youreyes will colonize something else.
So the brain has proclivities towards a certainkind of structure, especially early in development,
it’s unbelievably plastic, and so brainscan be organized and lateralized in a bunch
of different ways.
To simplify it, what you do is you kind oftake, well let’s take the most straight-forward
and typical brain and talk about it as ifit’s the canonical brain.
I think what you can say is, regardless ofwhere these systems are localized, they exist.
So it’s an oversimplification – whatever,doesn’t matter.
What you’ve got with regards to your corticesis a quick and dirty cortex, that’s the
right hemisphere, and then you’ve got along-term detailed cortex and that’s the
left hemisphere.
The left hemisphere is specialized for language.
Language cuts things up into little, tiny,bitty pieces.
That’s really useful if you’re doing little,tiny, bitty things.
You should be – precision, right?
Pinpoint accuracy; but that takes a lot oftime and a lot of computation.
Whereas the right hemisphere says, “yeah,yeah, let’s get to the bloody point.”
So it captures the thing in an image.
So like the monster I showed you from thehippie cartoon, that’s a right hemisphere
thing.
It’s an image that represents a class ofentities; which, of course, images do.
There’s this woman named - can’t remember- autistic woman.
She’s developed paddle-handling facilitiesall across –
“what’s her name?”
Student “Temple Grandin.”
Temple Grandin, yes a very cool person.
Yes I saw Temple Grandin speak at the Universityof Arizona at the Consciousness Conference,
and it was the funniest speech I’ve everseen in my life.
Not because it wasn’t perfect – it wasbloody perfect.
She’s a tough woman – she looks a likea cowboy, and she spent a lot of time with
animals.
She comes out on the stage in her cowboy outfitand she’s unbelievably straightforward and
without nuance – she’s autistic, she’sseverely autistic.
You know, her mother helped her a lot, shedeveloped this thing that she would go inside
to compress her and hold her – like a littlemachine and that would comfort her.
Anyways, she turned herself into quite theperson and she thinks, she thinks like an
animal.
This is why she can design cattle handlingfacilities, which are often slaughter houses,
so that the cattle don’t get all freakedout as they’re on their way to their eventual
demise.
So one of the things she does, is she walksthrough where the cattle are going, and anything
that bothers her, she assumes will bothera cow.
So for example, if the cows are walking throughthis spiral as they’re on their way to the
slaughter-house and there’s a coke can lyingon the ground, all the cows will stop and
look at the coke can – it’s anomalous.
Now, she talked a lot about how she thoughtand what she said was that she could not devise
abstract representations.
So she said, okay, imagine how a child drawsa house.
What is in that child’s house?
There’s a triangle and a square on the left,and then there’s another rectangle, and
another parallelogram, and there’s a doorand two windows, right?
Then there’s a chimney with smoke comingout – which is quite cool, it’s like why
is that?
Where’s the smoke?
You don’t see that in modern houses, butkids still do that.
And then there’s a tree, and usually there’sa sun, and then - house.
You think, oh, isn’t that cute, a simpledrawing.
That drawing is not simple.
You’ve never seen a house that looks likethat in your life.
It looks nothing like a house.
It’s not a house, it’s not a picture,it’s a hieroglyph.
It’s a pre-linguistic representation.
It’s like the essential elements of “house.”
So you might say what the child has done isextracted out all those things that are common
across all houses, and then represented that.
It’s not a drawing.
Now if you take autistic people, sometimes,and you get them to draw, they’ll start
in one corner of the house, and what they’lldraw is that house – with every damn brick
in place.
So there are autistic people, for example,who – they can look at a building and they
can count every single window at one glance.
Then, there’s another guy in England who’sreally famous, and this guy is unbelievable.
You take him up in a helicopter and show hima city that he’s never seen, then he goes
home and has a piece of paper, like as bigas a wall, and he starts in one corner and
he draws the entire city.
He doesn’t sketch it out – it’s fromthe bottom up.
That’s autistic savant drawing.
Often what happens is, it’s very realisticlooking.
What happens if the autistic drawings of blanklanguage is they stop being able to draw.
That’s because the abstraction interfereswith the realism.
It’s really hard to draw a hand.
The reason for that is if you draw a hand,you draw a hieroglyph of hand.
This is what a hand looks like.
You try to draw your hand and it’s reallystrange.
One of the really strange things about tryingto draw your hand is that in order to draw
it, you have to stop seeing it as if it’sa hand.
Then it pops out and you think, my God, that’sthe weirdest looking thing.
It’s like a tree root, you know, it’slike a claw.
You know if you look at your hand like that,it looks nothing like a hand.
That’s how a hand looks.
What the hell’s that?
It’s like some sort of spider, but you haveto see it that way before you can draw it.
So partly what happens is, is that your capacityfor abstraction interferes with your ability
to see detail, that’s probably good – it’sone of the ways that you simplify the world.
Anyways, the right hemisphere looks like it’sspecialized for anomaly.
The way I look at it is this: Okay, so you’vegot your hippocampus down there, and it’s
keeping track of the comparison between whatyou want and what you think is happening.
“Bang!”
Something emerges, and it’s anomalous.
You don’t know what the hell’s going on.
So you freeze, that’s the notoric representation.
Then you start to feel anxious.
Then the right hemisphere comes up with somepictures – what might this be?
You can experience this at home, for yourown enjoyment.
Let’s say you’re home at two in the morning,it’s dark and you’re alone.
Maybe you’ve watched a horror movie, soyou’re all nicely blank.
You know and then you hear a noise in anotherroom and that noise shouldn’t be there.
So you’re going to go investigate, right?
So let’s say the door’s just a littlebit open, and it’s dark in the room, and
you have to put your hand in to turn on thelight.
You just watch what your imagination populatesthat room with when you do that.
You know, it’s like – guy with axe, snake,alligator, like whatever!
You’re right hemisphere is going: theremay be one of this class of dangerous thing
in there.
What it’s doing is it’s basically comingup with a hypothesis: what sort of monster
might be in there.
You’re all freaked out about that, eventhough you know – who knows what happened;
nothing but something creaked, but you’reall on edge because your brain doesn’t work
at night like it does during the day.
Everyone knows that – wake up in the middleof the night, a manner of horrors go through
your imagination, and that usually happenswhen you’re asleep.
You’re asleep for that most of the time,but sometimes you wake up and you worry about
everything.
Anyways, so that’s the right hemisphere– it’s coming up with pictures of what
might be there.
They’re generally monstrous pictures andthe reason for that is, well it’s obvious,
what the reason for that is.
You’ll probably turn the light on and lookanyways, even though you might sort of peer
around the corner, and then when there’snothing you’ll be embarrassed about how
foolish you are.
But you can see the instinctual behavior rightthere, and it’s wise.
You know, there’s a low probability thatsomething terrible is there.
Low probability times infinitely equals largedanger.
So if there’s a two percent chance thatthere’s a killer in there, it pays to be
a little on the tense side, because beingkilled really sucks.
So you’re primed to feel negative emotionmore intensely, because you’re so vulnerable.
Anyways, that’s kind of what the right hemisphereis up to – it does quick and dirty representations.
It also does categorization, so it’s not– it doesn’t give you exactly realistic
representations of what’s there.
What it does instead, is it gives you categoricalrepresentations.
So you might say, “how should you representan unknown danger?”
You should use an amalgam of all known dangersto represent it.
That is what it is in a sense, you know?
That’s why I talked to you about the categoryof “all dangerous things.”
So the Aboriginals in Australia have thiscategory which is, “women, fire, and dangerous
things.”
Well you think, well why are all of thosethings in that category?
It’s not that hard to figure out if youthink about it, but it’s also a category
that you very frequently see, say in Disneycartoons.
So the Wicked Queen, for example, in SleepingBeauty – she’s constantly bursting into
flames and turning into a dragon and no oneseems to object to that – it makes perfect
sense that the Wicked Queen would turn intoa fire-breathing dragon.
It doesn’t make any sense at all, althoughit does, but it’s not a rational transformation.
But because it’s in keeping with an archetypalstructure, everybody goes, “yeah, of course
that’s what she’s going to do.”
It happens all of the time in Disney movies– like Ursula, remember her from the Little
Mermaid?
She’s trying to keep her daughter from becomingconscious.
Yeah, nice Mother doing that.
She traps old Zeus – she squeezes his soulto death and traps him in the underworld.
He’s also – well, we won’t get intothat.
Anyways, what happens to Ursula is when youfinally get her irritated enough she grows
into this huge, ship-destroying, storm monsterthat’s part octopus – a giant octopus.
You think, “well, that makes sense.”
Okay, it doesn’t make a lot of sense, butit’s a kind of hypothesis.
Now that’s a representation of Mother Nature– red and tooth and claw, and there’s
also a reason that’s female – it’s notfemale, it’s feminine – it’s actually
a different thing.
We’ll get to that.
So the right hemisphere, well it’s specializedfor anomaly – it does quick and dirt analysis
under the influence of the limbic system.
It’s not linguistic, so I would say thatit’s still dominated by the sub-cortical
systems.
My suspicion is that animals are still dominatedby the sub-cortical systems.
Their brains work from the bottom up.
We have a top down module.
That’s at least in part of the left hemispherelinguistic system.
It’s a new thing that people have, and it’sbased on our capacity to abstract, so that
would partly be visual, like hieroglyphic,and then also to transform things into linguistic
form.
It seems to me that that’s the part thatwe really identify as ourselves, right?
It’s weird – let’s say you’re homealone, and you get freaked out and all these
images come to mind; do you think of thoseimages as part of you?
You think of them more as these things thatappeared to you.
That’s what you think about your dreams.
They’re things that appeared to you - they’renot you.
Why would you think that?
I mean, they’re in your experiential space,so why is there that separation between you
and your dream?
“I had a dream.”
Not, “I thought up a dream.”
Or, “look what I created,” it’s likethere you are, the observer, and up comes
a dream.
It’s very, very weird.
It shows you that there are forces operatingin your psyche that are impersonal, genuinely
impersonal.
That’s part of what you call the collectiveunconscious.
It’s the thing that generates these weirdimages and protects you.
It’s nature, that’s for sure.
It can be absolutely terrifying.
People can have dreams that are so terrible– well like the one my little nephew had,
that’s pretty damn nasty; little greasydwarf things with big beaks, that’s a very
ugly representation, and if that wasn’tbad enough there had to be a fire-breathing
dragon behind them, creating them endlessly.
There’s no bloody-wonder he was waking upscreaming.
It’s like, “Oh no, I figured out whatlife is like.”
At four, that’s pretty traumatic.
So, okay, now the left hemisphere.
This is Elkonon Goldberg’s hypothesis.
You get one hemisphere or system that operateswhen you know what you’re doing and when
what you want is happening.
That’s the happy-talky part that thinksit knows what-the-hell is going on.
Then you have another part that only turnson when you don’t know what’s going on.
It’s full of anxiety and negative emotion.
The right hemisphere, by the way, is specializedfor negative emotion.
If you sustain right, pre-frontal damage,you become inappropriately happy.
You’re full of positive illusions.
You think, “well, that’s an excellentthing.”
It’s not – you make really impulsive riskydecisions and your life goes directly to hell.
You need the negative emotion, obviously.
The reason you suffer with negative emotionis because if you didn’t suffer with negative
emotion, you’d suffer from being destroyed.
Those are your options.
There are people, by the way, who are bornwithout pain.
You think, “hey, that’s a good deal.”
They never last past twenty, and part of thereason for that is – you don’t notice
this – but while you’re sitting there,you’re going like this all the time.
The reason for that is that if you sit forany length of time on one part of your body,
then it doesn’t get much blood and it doesn’tget oxygenated.
You do that, it bitches a little bit, a littlepain, so you shift.
You shift and you shift, so you’re justdoing this all of the time.
Otherwise you wear out your damn body andyou get bed sores, or that sort of thing.
These people that don’t have any pain, theyjust wear themselves out.
So you need the negative emotion, it keepsyou going.
It can get out of hand and have its own pathologies,but it’s definitely necessary.
So the right hemisphere does negative emotion.
Inhibition of behavior – that’s the freezingthat’s attended on anxiety.
It does image processing, holistic thinking– so it’s the quick and dirty hemisphere
- pattern recognition, pattern generationand gross motor action.
That’s interesting too, because the grossmotor action is, again, the quick and dirty
stuff.
If you need to slap something away, it doesn’treally matter that it’s a gross-motor gesture.
You don’t have to go like this, and be precise;it can just be fast and sloppy, and it will
still work.
Now the left hemisphere is specialized forwhen you know what-the-hell’s going on and
you can concentrate on the details.
So then you can think about it in terms ofthe hierarchy that we discussed, right?
So what it implies is that at the level ofspecific, fine, detailed motor output, the
left hemisphere is operating.
That’s kind of associated with positiveaffect – I know exactly what I’m doing
and I’m making minor adjustments and everything’sgoing well.
If you go up the hierarchy towards more andmore abstracted representations then increasingly,
that’s moving over to right hemisphere space.
So that’s also partly why, when you disruptthose higher-order structures, literally all
hell breaks loose.
So, left hemispheres.
Operation in explored territory – positiveemotion, activation of behavior, so that’s
also exploration.
Word processing, linear thinking, detail recognition,detail generation, and fine motor action.
So you need one system that works when youdon’t know what’s going on and you need
another system that works when you do.
Sometimes you’re where you don’t knowwhat you’re doing and sometimes you’re
where do know what you’re doing.
Now Ramachandran, who’s a fairly famousneurologist, who operates out of LA, he associated
the totalitarian ego with hyper dominationof the left hemisphere.
The reason he did that is very cool.
So he’s got these patients that have – what’sit called, is it agnosia?
It isn’t, we’ll call it neglect.
Okay so this is what happens.
You have a stroke and the stroke affects theback part of the right hemisphere, alright?
So what happens?
Your left side is paralyzed; you can’t doanything with it.
Okay, so, however you also don’t noticethat it’s not working, so one of the things
you might do if you do become aware – you’relaying in bed, you’ve had a stroke and for
some reason you notice that there’s an armlying in there with you.
Then what you do is you try to pick it upwith your other hand and you try to throw
it out of the bed.
When you find out that it’s attached toyou, because it’s not your arm, you’re
not very happy – or maybe you throw yourselfright out of bed.
Then if someone gets you to draw a clock youdraw half a clock and if you eat a plateful
of food you eat half the plate, unless someoneturns it – and then you eat half of that.
So half the world is gone – it’s hardto imagine what that would be like.
I think what it’s sort of like is – youknow how there’s a whole world behind you?
You don’t detect it as not there – it’snot black or anything, like when your eyes
are closed – it’s just not there.
I think what happens with people with neglectis that the “not there” becomes three
quarters instead of just half.
It’s something like that anyways.
You don’t know what’s going on and thereyou are like this and someone says to you,
“I notice that you can’t move your leftarm today.”
What do you say?
You say, “that’s because I’m tired.”
Or, “I don’t feel like moving it.”
And so forth, so you have this reason thatyou’re not going to move it.
You might say the same thing about the leftfoot, “yeah well I don’t feel like moving
it.
“ You’ll have some story about why you’renot going to move it.
Okay so that’s fine.
Freudian’s thought about that is traumaticdenial.
It was so overwhelming to you that you lostthe left part of your body.
You couldn’t face it and you just deniedit happened.
It’s not a bad theory, it’s not quiteright, but it’s not a bad theory.
I’ll tell you a couple of related stories.
Let’s say you’re on dialysis.
That sucks.
You have to have this big thing in your arm,it’s like a shunt, and you have to go get
hooked up to a dialysis machine like all thetime.
Your kidneys are failing and who wants that?
Nobody, so everybody thinks: time for a kidneytransplant, and then they’re on a long waiting
list and they get one kidney.
That’s not very many kidneys.
Then they say, “okay, you got your kidneyand everyone’s thrilled about that, here’s
your anti-rejection medication, make sureyou take it.
Then a year later you lose your kidney, why?
You don’t take your damn anti-rejectionmedication, that’s the most common reason.
You might think, well why in the world wouldyou not take your anti-rejection medication?
The Freudians would say denial.
Here’s a different hypothesis: Your wholemap of you is person with kidney.
Then you lose your kidneys and it’s likeyou’re a whole, weird thing that you have
no idea about.
It’s virtually impossible for you to updateyour model.
You think, does that make any sense?
Have you ever lost a tooth?
Right.
What does your tongue do for six months?
You’re sitting there and your tongue isfiddling away there like a mad dog investigating
every teensy nook and cranny like it’s anobsessive exploratory device.
It does it even when you don’t want it to.
Then six months later you get your mouth remapped.
That’s just a tooth, man; lose a kidneyand see what happens.
Or lose the whole left side of you body, it’slike, what are you going to do about that?
Well, okay, then Ramachandran, he’s testingthese people for balance.
What he does is he checks out this phenomenacalled nystagmus, and so if you pour cold
water in someone’s ear their eyes will moveback and forth because it screws up the – you
know you have a balance system in you, inear your ear – and if you pour cold water
in there it screws it up and then your eyesmove back and forth.
You know, it’s not very pleasant.
What he found was that if he poured cold waterin the left ear, then all of a sudden the
people would wake up and go, “Oh my God,I don’t have the left side of my body,”
and then they’d have a catastrophic emotionalexperience and they’d be all upset about
it crying away; which is of course what theyshould do.
Twenty minutes later it would wear off andyou’d say is there anything wrong with your
left side and they’d say well yeah, I justdon’t feel like moving it.
So what seems to have happened is something– so there’s a body representation center
in the back of the right hemisphere.
You blow that sucker out with a stroke, andthat means that you can’t represent that
part of your body anymore.
Maybe there are tatters of it left; it’slike a network that’s damaged and under
some conditions you can more or less get itto operate so you pour some cold water in
the ear and you shock the whole system.
Then there’s enough neurological activityso the network kicks in, even though it’s
damaged for ten minutes, and then you getthis tremendous burst of negative emotion
- which is what the right hemisphere shouldbe doing when you lose half of your body.
You experience that when your left hemisphereis flapping away trying to account for this
– which it can’t, because it’s sucha massive, utter catastrophe.
Then you know, the shock wears off and “bang!”the system shuts back down, and “poof!”
you’re back in denial.
That’s a good example of the relationshipbetween the left hemisphere and the right
hemisphere.
The left hemisphere has a fixed idea aboutthe world.
So in some sense you might think about itas the instantiation of your latest avatar;
you can certainly see that with people whoare ideologically possessed.
They’ve got this verbal system that accountsfor the whole world and there’s just no
damn way that thing’s going anywhere.
It’s got this totalitarian aspect becauseit wants to explain every last thing; it doesn’t
like anomaly at all.
It hasn’t come to terms with anomaly atall.
There’s no sense of transformation withinthe system, which is partly why totalitarian
systems die.
The Red Queen said to Alice in Wonderlandwhen she was in the underworld, “in my kingdom
you have to run as fast as you can just tostay in the same place.”
That’s why totalitarian systems don’twork.
The damn environment keeps shifting aroundon them.
If they’re fixed in place, the gap betweentheir theory and reality gets larger and larger
and larger and larger until finally they fallinto a pit; and that’s the end of it.
That’s what happens to people too, if theydon’t stay updated.
They let things get away on them; eventuallythe ignored reality comes flooding back, and
we’ll see that represented in mythologybecause it’s represented very nicely in
mythology.
It’s why often dragons in fairytales, forexample, in the Saint George story, and in
the Hobbit for that matter – the dragonis an eternal thing: it lives underneath the
earth and most of the time it leaves you thehell alone.
Now and then it comes back and it tries todestroy the city, and then you have to zip
out there and fight the thing so you can getit to go back in its hole.
Maybe you get the treasure that it’s carrying,and then it’s back in the hole for while;
but that thing’s coming back.
It’s always coming back, and so you buildthe walls and all that, that’s fine.
A dragon can destroy any walls.
Walls aren’t enough – you have to be preparedto go out there and fight the damn thing,
and that’s how you keep it at bay.
That basically means you have to maintaineverything that you build, it’s something
like that, right?
Otherwise it falls apart with increasing entropy.
Alright, so Goldberg thought about this as an anomaly
system, a novelty system and a routinizationsystem.
I intended to think about it from more ofan Anthropological or an Ethological perspective;
thinking about an animal (us) in our naturalenvironment.
It’s not so much novelty versus routinization,as it’s explored versus unexplored territory.
That’s what the world’s made out of – it’smade out of explored versus unexplored territory.
So there’s a domain that you inhabit, whichis the center of the universe, from a mythological
perspective, with you right in the middleof it.
Around you is this circle, which is your place,which you move around with you, and in that
circle you know what-the-hell’s going on.
That’s partly because you’ve mapped it,but it’s also partly because you don’t
go outside of it.
You have your friends and you have your routineand that’s nested inside your culture, and
you try and keep that thing from flippingupside down.
You do that all sorts of way: partly by doingthe same thing all the time, but also partly
by refusing to go anywhere that might seriouslychallenge your beliefs.
Fair enough, you can understand that, althoughit makes you weak to do that, because you’re
not as prepared as you might be.
So you could say human beings are tribal,social animals that have a territory.
Then you think, “well what’s the territory?”
Well let’s say tree-dwelling chimp ancestors;the territory’s the jungle.
No, it’s not.
That’s not the territory.
The territory is a little bit of the jungle,plus the things that come in from the outside,
plus the primate dominance hierarchy thatexists in that area.
So that’s the territory, that’s the environment.
For mythological reasons we tend to make aseparation between the environment and culture.
Yes, it makes sense at one level of analysis,but at another level of analysis all it does
is screw you up.
You’re territory, fundamentally, isn’tthe world; not the natural, objective world.
You want to stay as far away from that thingas you possibly can.
Your territory is that circle of people withwhom you spend ninety percent of your time.
If you’re a chimp, for example, or someother kind of monkey, highly social, what
do you do all day?
You sleep, you eat, you chew leaves if you’rea chimp, and you groom other chimps.
It’s constant social interaction, and you’rejockeying for a position in the dominance
hierarchy like mean girls in that movie, youknow.
You’re mapping out the social territoryknowing who’s who, and what’s what, and
then trying to get up somewhere near the top.
That’s your environment, that’s your environment,and so your world is that social, natural
circle, which is a four-dimensional territory,because its got length, width and height – plus
it stretches across time.
So it’s this transforming natural entity.
Inside that there’s a pyramid.
The pyramid is made out of all the primatesthat you interact with.
That’s the world; circle with a pyramidon it.
Now I’ll give you a vision, this is a visionI had once when I was trying to figure this
stuff out.
Now what is the world?
So imagine that there’s a field in frontof you that stretches as far as you can see.
You’re flying above it.
What you see everywhere are these pyramids.
Let’s say for the sake of argument, thatthey’re skyscrapers made out of glass.
There are tears in them.
You fly down and one’s here and one’shere, and some of them are really big and
some of them are really small.
They’re just everywhere.
You’re flying around above them, and youfly close enough to look inside and what you
see inside them are people all packed together,trying to scramble up to the top.
That’s the world, that’s reality.
The funny thing is, is that you can be inone of those pyramids clambering away to the
top, or you can be flying above it – thoseare your options.
If you have to choose, you should be flyingabove it.
So the relationship between the self and theego avatar is the same as the relationship
between the thing that’s flying above, andthe thing that’s within one of those pyramids
trying to scramble to the top.
You know, well you say well I’m going toget to the top.
“Top of what?”
There’s a hundred tops, there’s two hundredtops.
Then you might say, “well is there anythingabove the top?”
There is, there’s the part of you that isn’tentrapped within that particular system and
that can move from place to place.
If you look at Egyptian mythology: so youknow you’ll see if you look at the back
of the American dollar bill, that’s a symbolof value, right?
Okay, so what’s the pyramid?
There’s a pyramid on it, right?
What’s the top of a pyramid?
It’s a triangle, it’s separate from thepyramid.
There’s an eye inside of it.
That’s because the top of the pyramid isan eye, and it’s separate from the pyramid.
What that means, fundamentally, is that thething that transcends the structure is attention,
voluntary attention.
Now the Egyptians worshiped voluntary attentionin the form of Horus, because he was a God.
I’ll tell you about Horus in detail.
One of Horus’ avatars was the falcon.
The reason for that is falcons can really,really, really see.
They fly around, and so they’re like theking’s eyes.
Like the little bird Zazu in the Lion King.
He was the king’s eyes, the thing that fliesaround above.
He was a particular enemy of Scar, rememberScar eats him at the beginning and then spits
him out.
The reason that the King’s eyes is an enemyof scar is because the King’s eyes can see
what he is, right?
He’s the eternal force that works to disruptthe kingdom and bring everything into ruins.
Classic myth, classic myth, partly accountingfor why it was the largest selling, highest
grossing cartoon in Disney history.
They got the mythology pretty right.
So you might say, “what’s a human beinglike?”
Remember I told you that when Penfield wasmapping the brain he was poking people.
You can either poke them along the sensorystrip, which is – if the motor strip is
here, the sensory strip is just behind it.
The motor strip is where the motor systemsof your body are represented in so far as
you can control them.
The sensory strip is where the sensory systemsare represented in so far as you can feel
them.
So what this is, is a – the body is laidout weirdly on the motor cortex.
One of the things that’s pretty funny isthat the genitalia area in the sensory cortex
is right beside the feet.
So I think that’s why people have foot fetishesand love foot massages, is because they’re
spreading activation from the foot area tothe genital area, and God only knows why that
is.
Maybe because you had to have had really sensitivefeet to stomp around without stepping on really
horrible things.
So you can put this weird, stretched-out,body representation together in a representational
form like this, they call that the homunculus,which is like a little-man that exists inside
your brain.
So what you see, that’s the motor-homunculus,not the sensory-homunculus.
So what do you see?
Well what is a person as far as its brainis concerned?
Well, hand – that’s for sure.
Thumb, that’s for sure – your thumb isas representative of your whole body.
It’s because your torso is hardly representedat all.
Why is that?
How many things do you manipulate with yourchest?
None.
You don’t have motor control over it, soit’s not represented.
So, the hands man, those things, they’rerepresented like mad.
So are the face, and the lips and the tongue.
There’s a bunch of reasons for that: Oneis when you’re an infant, you explore like
mad with your mouth – but you do that yourwhole life because when you eat- you know
what it’s like.
If you’re eating something and there’sa bit of sand in it, you find it and you take
it out.
You can detect this teeny, little thing that’snot supposed to be in your mouth.
Well that’s a good thing because lots ofthings aren’t supposed to be in your mouth.
That’s part of the reason.
The other part of the reason is, well thinkabout what you do with your tongue?
There are a lot of things you do with yourtongue: Some of them are eating, some of them
are talking.
Some of them are all sorts of intimate behaviors,that thing is wired up; and it’s wired up
right at birth.
Then it’s the same with your lips and therest of your mouth, you use that to communicate.
Your hands wander around, taking the worldapart, and putting it back together, which
is exactly what your brain does, and thenyou blab about what you’re doing to everyone.
That’s basically a human being.
I like to think of this thing as it’s acomical representation of the hero that goes
out to confront the world, right?
The hero has two elements.
One is explore, and that’s where the westis powerful.
We have a really well developed mythologyof the exploratory hero.
Where we’re not so well developed is thesecond part.
In the second part of the classic hero story,you’re supposed to come back and communicate
about what you’ve found.
So if there’s an individual explorationelement, and then there’s a communicate
and update the culture element.
Both of those are equally important an it’ssomething we don’t do well, we don’t have
much respect for tradition in the west, andit’s a really, really big problem.
The ethical responsibility of a human beingis to take the dead culture, so that’s the
dead father, or the dead God, and to revivifyit with attention and communication.
If you fail to do that then everything disappears.
We’re failing to do that – we’re leavingit all behind instead.
It’s not a good idea.
You know if the old Gods die as Nietzschesaid they had, new Gods swoop in very rapidly
and if you thought the old God was bad, youwait until the new God gets a hold of you.
So, well we saw what happened in the twentiethcentury, with all of the ideologies that sprang
up in the absence of classical religious belief.
Okay, you’re not so thrilled with Catholicism,if you think about that as the fundamental
tradition of the West.
You know, with the witch burnings and theinquisition and all that.
It’s like yeah, yeah, get a load of theNazis and then see what you think; or the
Communists for that matter - from bad to worsein an unimaginable way.
You know, and it’s partly because thosearchaic systems, those archaic, religious
systems, they weren’t ideologies, they werea whole different class of thing.
We don’t understand them very well, andit’s not good because you cannot live without
understanding them.
You don’t know who you are.
Then you fall prey to weird mental diseases,like Nihilism, that’s one.
The other one is ideological possession – soyou become a Totalitarian or a Nihilist.
That’s a bad outcome.
You might think, “well, what’s the alternative?”
Well, you know what happens in Pinocchio,right?
You’ve watched Pinocchio?
Okay, I often show Pinocchio to this class,but I don’t know if I’m going to do that
this year.
Anyways, Pinocchio, he’s a puppet, a marionette.
Someone else is pulling his strings.
He has a wooden head.
He’s not very bright.
He hasn’t banged the world at all.
He’s got a good father, the old Geppetto,who would really rather that he was a real
boy, a real person.
So he’s the kind of father that wants toproduce an individual, not a slave.
That’s why in his workshop it’s all friendlyand there’s a nice fire, and he’s making
toys and there’s lots of music, it’s like“Go Geppetto!” he’s a good guy.
He makes this little puppet and he sends himout in the world.
He says, “go be a real boy.”
Well, Pinocchio runs into a whole class ofdifferent obstacles; one is evil, that’s
the Coachman, and the Italian stereotype guywho makes him a dancing puppet celebrity.
I think that’s pretty funny, that’s reallyprescient.
You might think well what’s the goal ofyour typical bone-headed, mid-adolescent in
North America – unearned celebrity.
Well that’s exactly what Pinocchio goesfor first.
That doesn’t work out so well because heends up a slave and then the next thing that
happens is he capitalizes on the fact thathe’s vulnerable, and pretends he’s sick
and goes off for a vacation, under the directionof the Coachman (who’s basically Satan in
disguise).
Then he goes out to treasure island and meetsall of the delinquents who are just like Nazis,
and turns out in fact the whole ploy is toenslave everyone, to deprive them of their
voice – that’s the donkey’s breying– and to make them into slaves.
Pretty damn horrifying and that movie cameout around the time that the Nazis were really
grasping power in central Europe.
They got it exactly right.
Here’s what’s really going on behind thescenes.
Then what happens is Pinocchio turns halfwayinto a braying donkey.
He’s gone off the path and in order to getback on it he tries to go home.
It’s too late, he can’t go home, becausehe’s not a kid anymore.
He goes home and Dad isn’t there, surprise,surprise.
Once you grow up and you go home, Dad isn’tthere – it’s just another human being.
So then what happens is he has to go intothe ocean.
Well that’s particularly weird, right?
There he is, half donkey, he’s a puppet,the dove comes down and drops him a message
from God.
It’s like the Holy Spirit descending, exceptit’s from the blue fairy, weirdly enough.
The message says you have to go to the deepestpart of the ocean and rescue your father.
Yeah that is what you have to do if you don’twant to be a bloody, puppet donkey.
You have to go down into the depths and findyour dead Father and you have to revivify
him.
That’s what happens.
So Pinocchio goes way down there into thedeepest depths and finds Monstro, who’s
a monster so terrible that the fish swim awayat the sound of his voice.
Just like, “he who shall not be named – Voldemort.”
You can’t even say his damn name.
Same with Monstro.
Pinocchio goes down there, he goes into thewhale, what happens?
Geppetto says there’s no getting out ofthis, there’s no getting out of this.
We just have to sit here and cook fish andPinocchio thinks, “cook!”
He starts breaking up all the chairs and everythingand his Father is freaking out, “what are
you doing breaking all of these chairs?
What are we going to sit out?”
Pinocchio lights them on fire.
He’s a master of fire.
It’s a Shemanic ritual.
He is a master of fire and that’s what humanbeing is.
He gets everything burning, of course Geppetto’sall freaked out about that because what are
the going to sit on, and Pinocchio thinks,“who cares about sitting?
We’re going to solve the problem once andfor all.”
Then the whale turns into a fire-breathingdragon, which is pretty damn weird thing for
a whale to do.
He half-kills Pinocchio, he washes up on shoredead, but he saves his father.
Then at the very end of the movie he’s lyingon his bed, all drowned.
So he’s a dead puppet now.
Do you want to be a live puppet or a deadpuppet?
Well the maybe the dead puppet is better thanthe live puppet, it depends on where your
going.
Then he’s on the bed, and the blue fairycomes down and says well you’ve been honest
and courageous, “bang!” now you’re real.
Then they have a little part, and that’sjust exactly right, they got that exactly
right.
That’s part of the hero mythology, it’sthe rescuing of the father.
Student: Why do you have to rescue the father?
Otherwise you’re a corpse.
You’re a historical creature, you’re acultural creature.
You cannot live without your culture.
You think you can, but you can’t.
it disappears, and look, I’ll give an example.
In the Mesopotamian creation myth, which I’mgoing to tell you about next week, one of
the things that happens is that the firstround of Gods, so they’re like primordial
forces, they’re pretty damn careless, andthey kill their father.
They make this place to live on his corpse.
That’s where we live, we live on the corpseof our ancestors.
We live in the society, it’s dead, it’sthe product of dead people.
It’s got this dead element, but we’reliving on it.
They’re very careless, they kill it, sothey render it completely dead.
Well what happens is Tiamat, who’s the Motherof Chaos, she comes flooding back and she
thinks, “oh you killed the thing that protectsyou.
You just wait to see what happens.”
That’s exactly it, if you kill the thingthat structures you, you won’t know it – it’s
like Nietzsche’s prediction from the deathof God.
You killed this, think it doesn’t make anydifference, - wrong.
It’s like the Striders protecting the Hobbits.
If you get rid of the thing that protectsyou then chaos comes flooding in and you have
no idea what’s possible.
We do, though, because we lived through thetwentieth century.
We know exactly what’s possible.
Hundreds of millions of unnecessary deaths,that’s what’s possible.
We’re lucky we didn’t blow the whole damnthing up, and we still could.
People pursing their dead ideologies – youdon’t rescue the dead Father, than you’re
the puppet of death, that’s what you are.
Okay, on that cheery note.