Today I will tell you about
 a different view of
 which is real.
 It is not easy to understand what is real because we do not possess unlimited knowledge
 so we always have some assumptions about what's most real,
 and it is very important
 what do you consider the most real because
 make decisions that affect your entire life based on those assumptions, whether you understand it or not,
 and if your assumptions are wrong
 or if you don’t complete them, you’ll pay dearly for it.
 I
 the assumptions we use in our culture,
 although they have allowed us to develop incredibly powerful technology,
 are also incomplete in ways that have cost us a lot and are extremely dangerous.
 From the beginning the age of science
 we live in a world
 where
 is lower
 the layers of reality consider something dead,
 like
 earth, like matter,
 they are objective,
 external,
 and whose no element contributes
 reality
 phenomena such as meaning or purpose.
 It’s all repressed into subjectivity and in a way into illusion,
 but
 it is by no means obvious that this set of assumptions is correct,
 because we do not own
 infinite knowledge and there are many things about the structure of being that we do not understand, and the main one is
 consciousness. We cannot explain that at all, and we cannot explain the role it seems to play in transformation
 potential into reality,
 and this is a role that physicists recognized almost a hundred years ago
 i
 which is still one of the greatest unknowns in science.
 There are also long ways we can know what is real,
 and these other ways have certain advantages, and one of the advantages
 is what protects us. When you know these other ways
 actions within reality, defining reality, protect us from certain types of pathology, and modern people are
 susceptible to various pathologies arising from assumptions that,
 which make up their systems they use to define reality and one of these pathologies is one type
 the nihilistic hopelessness that results from understanding
 that in the final analysis nothing really has any meaning and
 because life is hard, it's a meaning you can't escape,
 the compulsion to reject your faith in a positive or sublime meaning can weaken you in moments
 when you really can't afford it,
 and that opens the way to more important pathologies. These are pathologies of belief and I think we are
 saw the most horrific examples of this, hopefully these are the most horrific examples, from the 20th century where people, whose belief systems were destroyed
 at least in part through the competition of religious and scientific views, in large numbers turned
 mass movements that are in all their aspects a substitute, a more rational substitution in some way,
 for religious beliefs that no longer seemed sustainable, and the consequence of being interested only in destruction,
 because twice we came close to complete destruction, the first ‘60s and then the’ 80s, is that they are, even without complete
 the destruction of thousands of millions of lives lost as a result
 pathological belief systems in the 20th century.
 Well, if belief systems become pathological,
 that pathology can pose perhaps the greatest threat to our very existence, even if you are a Darwinist
 Either way you need to understand that the things that pose the greatest threat to your survival are
 most real and we have to face them somehow.
 There is another way of looking at things.
 I will start with the definition of this word, the word ‘phainesthai’ is the root of the word phenomenon.
 Phenomena are phenomena you observe, and ‘phainesthai’ means to illuminate, i
 phenomenologists who were interested in the things they illuminate assumed that the things that
 they present themselves to you as the most significant in fact and the most real,
 and I think you can confidently conclude that this is actually the way the brain is connected because your brain is connected
 so it reacts to things that have meaning before you create a perception of it as a thing, and the reason for that is
 that the meaning of things is in some ways more real,
 even more important than looking at things as objects. Well, for example,
 a famous group of philosophers,
 psychologist, said that when you approach a cliff you don't actually see that cliff but a place where you can fall,
 it is not that you attribute to a cliff as an object the meaning of the place from which you fall -
 first comes the understanding of where you fall from, and then the abstract understanding that it is a cliff, if at all
 you will realize it will be much later, conceptually later because even babies can recognize cliffs, and historically later.
 Poets have noticed this phenomenon of illumination
 realities have often associated it with childhood and I think there are good reasons for that. I think so
 that the brain is not so much a braking structure in children before it is fully developed.
 There are neurological reasons for this recognition but also
 and reasons derived from life experience levels. You can see when you are among the children
 that they are open to things in a way that adults are not, their eyes widen in amazement,
 and adults like to be with children for this reason, because although children require a lot of attention and
 in a way they are scary, if you have a connection with a child because it is so powerless,
 one of the ways you redeem yourself is by opening your eyes,
 eyes that the experience closed
 and learned to distance yourself from the things that shine, and when you have children you can look through their eyes again,
 and to me it's kind of like worse,
 they're like a candle or something that shines brightly and I think it's partly because we're not actually shielding ourselves from the fire,
 we see fire and therefore we cannot look away when it is present.
 I think the same thing happens when you fall in love with someone,
 if love is real, because true love gives you hints about a possible future, if you can
 Properly set you can take a look at a possible future when you are in love with someone.
 It doesn't happen without effort, but you can take a look
 and I think it's because when you fall in love,
 I think there is probably a biochemical transformation going on
 in perceptual structures that otherwise prevent you from seeing people, because you don’t actually see people but shadows.
 You, you
 the barriers are temporarily removed and what really shines there is irresistible,
 but stay in that state,
 Well, it requires a huge amount
 moral effort, it’s actually the right view of it.
 Wordsworth said of the children:
 Once upon a time, a stream, a meadow and a grove, the earth and every ordinary sight when clothed in the light of heaven,
 In their basic freshness and shine, they looked great to me. Who once was no more now;
 Everywhere, night or day, he turns,
 The things I saw now I will not be able to see again.
 Earth
 fills his lap with his own pleasures;
 to the desires which are in her natural benevolence, and, even with a certain Mother's affection, And without unworthy intent,
 The simple Stepmother tempts with everything she has to lead her Adoptive, her Tenant Man, to forget the splendors known to him,
 And that royal palace where it used to come from. (The song was translated by Marko Vesovic and Omer Hadziselimovic)
 What Wordsworth wants to say is that as you develop into a capable adult, which is exactly it
 the direction in which you should develop, a lot of what you are actually doing
 closes and narrows. You close and narrow towards a certain goal in a certain way and that is necessary because,
 how you develop
 you have to develop towards a certain way of being or you will not develop at all and you can remain a child forever.
 It goes up on its own.
 So, people are destined to narrow their perception, to sharpen and focus on something small to
 at least I can do that.
 But the price we pay is that we start replacing our relationship
 with
 to the unfettered reality of shadows that are just so complex that they allow us to do what we have to and nothing more.
 And somehow, even though we become more capable, on the other hand we are more blind and to some extent we know how it happens.
 It starts from the bottom and goes up. This is Magritte's painting and it has obvious meaning,
 in a way that we are blind
 even for what is directly in front of us, blinded by the things we see and think by looking
 we let light in but actually let only a small fraction of light in because we are capable
 just to think about small parts of everything, whenever we do something specific.
 A good part of what we do is review things, and a good part of your cortex is inhibitory,
 and Magritte is trying to approach it with this idea. There's a businessman, he's dressed in a suit,
 you can't see beyond what is immediate,
 right in front of his eyes. How does that happen?
 Well, let's say you're a baby. The first thing you learn is
 to build your body from the bottom up, build your own
 perceptual and action structures from the bottom up. Learn to move your hand. Learn to close your fist.
 Then learn to do useful things using these abilities. Lift the spoon, you have to do it to feed yourself.
 Learn to move the plate, learn to set the table.
 It is now starting to be social as well because you can set the table for yourself and for other people.
 Learn to save a meal. It is a more complex sequence of motor activities and perceptual abilities that is focused.
 As you continue to evolve the sequence you create becomes more complex
 but also more specific. You have to take care of your family which means there are many other things you don’t do.
 You have to find a good job
 which almost everyone in their youth perceives as a consideration of limitations, well not everyone but many people think, alas no,
 I will have to settle down in this role
 and I don't want to be just that,
 but it's better to have just that role than not to have any,
 and maybe the way to the other side is through that role and not around it.
 You cannot avoid the responsibility of narrowing, growing, and shaping and specializing. Be a good parent.
 That is what you are sacrificing for the next generation.
 Be a good partner, same thing.
 Be a good citizen. It is especially easy for young people to be skeptical about this
 because old society is always corrupt and archaic and blind and becoming a member of it seems to be a part of it
 you allow yourself to appropriate that same obsolete
 blindness.
 But it also educates you, shapes every word you say,
 it’s something you should be thankful for even though it has that outdated, archaic form.
 It is a necessary part of human responsibility, to become a good citizen, and that
 in a way it means sacrificing more of what could be
 at least to maintain what already exists.
 There’s one satirical English song from the late ’80s. "I am the image and opportunity of a modern major general,
 learned about vegetables, animals and minerals
 I know English kings and I quote historical battles, from the Marathon to Waterloo in categorical order. "
 And satire is, well, he possesses knowledge, he is
 official clerk which is
 very hard to work with, but at the same time very limited and categorical and the artist would of course rebel against that
 but it’s better than nothing, and that’s an alternative.
 Above that, perhaps
 the one above a good citizen because once a good citizen is not so good if you are a good citizen in Nazi Germany
 or a good citizen in the Soviet Union or in Mao China,
 you were narrowed down in a certain way, and maybe
 in a necessary way but also in a very pathological way.
 There seems to be something there, though there is acceptance
 that narrow view of the world is necessary, there must be something above that, and I think that is what can restore that
 the feeling you have, the feeling of being true
 connections with the deepest and most significant realities of life, and that means being a good person.
 It is above a good citizen. It's something else.
 It concerns the development of individuality and I also think that
 we are so programmed, we seem to be programmed to lose what we have in order to specialize,
 and to reopen when we specialize, when those skills become part of us and then we can cope
 with reality because we are better adapted, more fluid and more flexible. Then we can start opening the door again
 and I, I believe the nervous system is tuned
 to help you if you don't disturb him, if you notice, and you will notice by paying attention to things
 which appear to you, which illuminate in an interesting way, grab you and
 what grabs you is where
 the veil of ambiguity behind which you live does not obscure reality on the other side.
 It's as if there's a hole in the curtain
 through which a light penetrates that attracts you, that will pull you
 and then your interest is grabbed. This is done by your nervous system and not by yourself.
 It is an unconscious force.
 You might even say that the world itself has turned to you. Phenomenologists haven’t seen it that way, but it’s real
 phenomenon, it’s not some side thing, and you know that because you can’t live without it.
 You die, you get maimed, you get cynical, you get nihilistic,
 or you accept some crazy belief system if you are not connected to some real one
 with a revitalizing meaning in one’s own life. It’s hard to do that because it doesn’t necessarily bring you to perfection
 juxtaposition with society because it does not concern society, it does not concern a good citizen, it is something else. That's it
 which builds you so that you can become a good citizen.
 The Egyptians knew this a long time ago. They didn't really know,
 they portrayed it in plays and through mythology
 for they did not have the ability to express these ideas quite clearly, but the Egyptians worshiped the human eye
 and they worshiped him because they knew that the eye is what pays attention, we are very visual beings and our eyes are automatically
 attracted to things that appear or shine in front of us and you have to look at them.
 If you pay attention to
 things that illuminate
 because what you see is reality and not a curtain,
 you get access to the right information present in the world that is not packaged because it can be wrong,
 these are real
 information that stems from existence itself and if you pay attention to them
 it will help you get closer to your pre-set goals
 to become a good citizen, who are part of an innate value structure that you have accepted but at the same time
 will do something else. It will make you yes
 transform the nature of those goals because, as you explore that thing that interests you
 more and more information is being revealed, and then as you absorb that information, so you're essentially learning,
 you build yourself into another person, a stronger, better informed person, a more complete person
 with more integrity and strength, and with a clearer direction and at the same time
 you open the curtain and so you live more and more in the real world. As you get closer to a certain goal,
 even if it is culturally determined, what you learn along the way
 it changes you, it changes the nature of your goals.
 Things shine.
 And for a reason, and you already know that because when you deal with something that interests and preoccupies you,
 then you are actually alive, then life is worthwhile.
 So valuable that in those moments
 you don't even ask questions, the question leaves you because
 is the meaning of what you have united with so strongly that it can ward off adversity that you would otherwise
 marked life. Nietzsche said, a person who has a ‘why’ can endure any ‘how’,
 and it's very useful to know because you think, well,
 we are very vulnerable creatures, our lives end in disaster, terrible things happen
 and how do we handle it? The answer is, and always has been, that you have to be compliant with
 something that is above you because that alignment gives you the strength you need to deal with your awful limitations.
 You’ve seen this happen, people know it, everyone knows it. Only our culture is not good at expressing that.
 We lost a lot. We have not developed our knowledge of this as much as we have developed
 knowledge of the objective world and now we pay for it. You see it in weird places, on the right
 at the bottom is an old symbol called round chaos.
 Alchemists believed that the round chaos was what contained ...
 What the world is actually made of, what is most real and they conceptualized it as something like information.
 They considered it a combination of spirit and matter, and that combination of spirit and matter is information in a way
 because in that interaction you take some of the information and build yourself out of it,
 so it's a spiritual element, and you take some of the information and build the world out of it,
 it is a material element, and they thought of reality itself as something that
 precedes the spiritual and the material, and that reality is what shone on, and was dramatized in the stories,
 modern stories of transformation. The most interesting place where he appeared are the Harry Potter stories.
 At the heart of the Harry Potter story is a game called metloboy and metloboy
 win by playing a game that is kind of out of place,
 win by following,
 you find this thing that summons you, this golden thing that shines and moves, if you can catch it
 you won, your whole team won the game.
 Inside that is the resurrection stone, it’s a diamond, a gem, and it’s an idea
 yes, if you follow something that you find interesting,
 it will lead you through adversity, it will lead you to do hard things
 but not beyond your abilities because it is so made, and what will happen is, as you collide with the world
 chasing what interests you, you will settle,
 your molecules, structure, internal structure will become non-contradictory
 like the internal structure of a light-reflecting gem and it makes you solid and durable as well
 able to cope with the terrible circumstances of existence without becoming corrupt.
 TS Eliot said something about this,
 ‘We’re not going to stop researching, and the end of all our research will be coming to where we started
 and get to know the place for the first time. '
 This is a five-line summary
 most extraordinary
 elaborations of the nature of the relationship between individual human consciousness and reality itself
 ever written down, and the pinnacle of the thought system
 which has been evolving for thousands and thousands of years that we have lost and cannot properly express.
 Follow what interests you.
 It will take you to adversity and then guide you through it
 transform from a citizen to an individual and then the door will open for you again and
 then you will be strong enough for life.
 Then you will be strong enough not to succumb to pathological belief systems and not to move towards destruction.
 Thank you.