I don't want to go into the history but there'sactually a really neat history of exactly
why and how a particular set of ideas becameso important in the latter half of the 20th
century.
I'll give you just one example, but the ideaof operational management, which was innovated
during the heat of World War II and largelyto do things like make strategic decisions
about how we were going to go about movingships across the Atlantic or run bombing raids
on Germany using statistics, actually applyingstatistics to analyze the effectiveness of
different approaches and then therefore makingdecisions based on statistics.
And so operational management was very effectivein the military theater and the people who
had learned those techniques after the warpercolated out into the broader economy and
started applying those techniques in thingslike deciding how to run their businesses.
So that's the basic framework of the orderthat we built up until now.
Now, the idea of the Blue Church is tryingto get a sense of what it is that is the essence
of the control structure.
By control I don't mean necessarily anythingbad I just mean the mechanism by which we're
able to make collective decisions and engagein effective collective actions, the thing
that holds our decision and action structuretogether.
The control structure that still is the onethat we're operating under that came out of
that timeframe and the proposition is that,in addition to—and this is one piece but
it's a very important piece—that there'sa dominant role played by the structure of
media.
We're actually in the process of breakingthat apart right here so this is good.
We know that there's a particular dynamicassociated with the kinds of media that are
broadcast where one individual or group, becauseof the nature of the medium, so for example
broadcast television in the day of three networksthere was only three people who got to be
the anchors who communicated out to the entirepopulation.
It was a massive asymmetry between the speakerand the listener and there's no interaction.
So I am in a position of listening, you'rein a position of speaking and there's 30 million
of me and one of you.
Now, that's actually a very important dynamic.
If you don't understand the fact of that andits importance you're going to have a very
hard time understanding what actually happenedduring the latter half of the 20th century
as, in particular, television emerged as thedominant medium displacing radio and newspapers.
And by the way, you also have a hard timeunderstanding what's happening now has the
Internet is now emerging as the dominant mediumreplacing television.
Just understanding that transition and whatit implies and means at a deep level is sort
of fundamental for predicting future states.
So using sort of television as the metaphorI then looked back and said: all right are
there other things that we see that look likethat?
And it's actually quite interesting that,for example, school has a very similar shape
to it in the sense that you've got one speaker,a large audience and a very little interactivity,
particularly like the university setting wherethere's a lecture and there's 500 people in
the lecture hall.
That is effectively the same thing as televisionin the sense that the relationship of information
flow is effectively the same.
This is important both from sort of the socialdynamics as well as the psychological dynamics
because if as a child your primary relationshipto how you engage in culture is one of almost
certainly being a pure receiver then yourpsychological development, your set of assumptions
and habituations and how you adapt to theworld, will be associated with that environment.
You're adapting to your local environmentand this implies a certain set of deep psychological
structures.
So we get a relationship between the mechanismsand techniques and potentialities of broadcast
as a concept—so school, television, fillin the blank—and the behavior strategies,
the habits, and even the capacities of theindividuals in the social layer.
So when you get to the mid and late '90s you'reactually dealing with a society that could
be understood as the society of broadcastand that has implications for how decisions
are made.
So the society of broadcasts is characterizedby what you might call the Encyclopedia Britannica
model or the Walter Cronkite model where youhave a set of hierarchical structures where
the individuals who have permission, authority,and responsibility for speaking, for having
authority are selected in some fashion tobe positioned at the top of the broadcast
hierarchy and then the rest of us defer tothem.
And so somebody has written an article inthe Encyclopedia Britannica or some group
of people, some group of experts who havebeen nominated in some fashion to be positioned
as experts and at best take that responsibilityvery seriously, they pull the total set of
questions back into their centers of excellenceso they're having conversations in academic
environments and groups that get togetherin think tanks, they produce an authoritative
statement of what is in fact our collectiveopinion around this particular object.
They then disseminate it through a broadcastmedium and the rest of us listen to it, cohere
around it and say okay that's what we do andthen move forward.
And this is actually a very powerful mechanismbecause it allows us to simultaneously have
hundreds of millions of people broadly sharethe basic set of assumptions about the nature
of the world, the nature of what effectiveaction looks like, even values: what is important
and what's not important.
So a major piece, not the only piece, buta major piece of the transition that we're
going through is precisely the fact that thedecentralized communication infrastructure,
sometimes known as the Internet and all ofits manifestations and mobile and everything
else, radically changes that dynamic.
So the Internet is characteristically symmetrical,meaning that the number of people who can
speak is effectively everyone.
Obviously there's not an even distributionof audience among everyone, but it's not structurally
locked in.
And the relationship between speaking andreceiving has become intrinsically or at least
intuitively bi-directional.
Now this shift implies a very large numberof differential consequences so we can graph
the notion of the impact that it has on powerand the relationship between decision making
and action taking.
But there's also the impact that it has onpsychology.
The intuitive sense or the way that your brain,in fact even just your sort of way that you
go about making decisions in the world, actuallyhas to adaptively change.
So the people who grew up in the post-Internetenvironment have a fundamentally different
psychological set of structures like deephabitual architectures and expectations of
how to most effectively present themselvesin the world than people who grew up before
them.
So what that will mean is two things: oneis the set of techniques and approaches that
socially evolved in the television or in thebroadcast era are suddenly maladaptive in
this new psychological ecosystem.
So think like the Pepsi commercial that sofamously was a disaster.
That's very much the kind of thing that isproduced by a broadcast intuition.
"We get to send messages and those messagesare things that you receive."
But the psychology and the technology of theInternet or of the decentralized or the symmetrical
medium is one of: "No, no we get to critique.
We get to directly respond to."
And things that feel like they are broadcastor feel like they are quite obviously intending
to influence us emotionally, we know whatthat feels like and it doesn't work anymore
so we're going to respond to that and ourability to respond swarms around it and breaks
it up.
And so this, for example, is I think at leasta reasonably good explanation for what's been
happening in the political domain over thepast 30 or 40 years and certainly over the
past two.