I'd like to begin by asking you why youthink that we should
care about animals and why our dietary choices are so important.
Why we should care about animals is because we effect them and it's important to know how we effect
them and to be able to really takeresponsibility for that.
The key for me is the relationshipbetween sentience and sovereignty.
Sentience is the capacity for somethingto feel,
to suffer, to love, to want
and sovereignty is its freedom to directits own life.
And I think the essential insight
on the topic of rights, whether we'retalking about
rights of other races, rights ofwomen, rights of any group that has been
marginalized, rights other species, 
is that if something
is sentient, it should be acknowledgedas sovereign.
If something has the ability to suffer orto experience joy, if it can feel,
it should get to direct its own lifeaccording to what would optimize those
feelings for it.
Earlier in human history,
we've subjugated other people in waysthat we no longer find okay, through slavery, 
through patriarchal domination and when we progressively came to recognize,
women or people with another skin color orkids, they feel as much as we do and their
life matters and they should have thesame sovereign rights, 
it's really the next extension of thatnow to
all the other animal species. And empathyis really this progressive process of
recognizing that things that aredifferent than us
have similarities with us. At first ifsomeone had a different skin color from us,
 we could make them different enough
then we could torture them and think itwas okay and
with more awareness and empathy we start to recognize there's actually more similarity, 
there was enough similarity between us. that we can relate to their experience
and then it wasn't okay to inflict anexperience and then we wouldn't want.
And the truth is even though animals arevery different than us
and many ways, they share hurt
and suffering and love and
playfulness and depending upon where inthe evolutionary spectrum they are they, 
show those things more less
but the ability to feel pain is all theway down the most fundamental animals.
Recognizing that, we need to takeresponsibility for how effect them.