When I started working on this problem
Or, I guess, when when it started working on me
Was probably really in the mid 80's and I found myself
Suffering from two things one was a very lengthy sequence of nightmares about Nuclear destruction
and they're very affecting dreams and
associated with that was a sense of amazement that a
dream that was that awful could reflect a reality that could be that awful
and an additional
amazement out the fact that, despite
the production of thousands and tens and thousands of weapons of unimaginable destruction
and that qualitative qualitative change in human capacity that represented
That people could go about their day-to-day lives without
acting as if anything fundamental whatsoever had changed
Now I've never really been able to figure out why that disturbed me so much
when it seemed to not disturb
to any
profound degree most of the people I knew
It doesn't really matter
The upshot of it was that I spent...
I probably spent my whole life trying to understand what evil was and, more importantly, what might be done about it
it's a strange pursuit in some ways for an academic done undertake because
Academics tend to talk about academic things. And one thing you can say about evil is that, whatever it is, it's not bloody well academic
It's not an intellectual issue. It's an existential issue and
it's it's not a theoretical issue. It's an it's an issue that deals with that
absolute nature of reality and
I guess sometimes I think that people who go into Academia
Go into Academia to shield themselves from having to ask questions about the absolute nature of reality
so
Anyways, I think before you can talk about something
Before you can dare to talk about something like evil
You should do some thinking about what it is that you're talking about
Definitionally speaking. I learned this I believe from
a historian named Jeffrey Burton Russell
Who wrote a very detailed history of the idea of the Devil in the 1980s when,
such histories were strange, to say the least, he was very interested
in the history of the embodiment of ideas of evil and
One of the things his work did for me was to help me
clarify the distinction between two terrible things
The distinction that has to be made and that's the distinction between tragedy and evil
and I don't think you can talk about it evil at all until you distinguish it from tragedy and
so I'm going to try to distinguish evil from tragedy by making some reference to the essential existential condition of human beings
I would say that the nature of the human being is such that it consists of
a confrontation with the bounded finite with the unbounded infinite,
and that those are the bare facts of the matter and the facts are that
The world of experience as it presents
itself to us
is literally and not metaphorically
complex beyond our capacity to understand
and that means  that people deal in a real sense on an ongoing
basis with the infinite and I believe that that fact is the reason why religious experience is essentially...
And belief is essentially endemic to mankind, it's a human universal
and it's not because people believe, it's because
human existence as such consists of a confrontation between the finite and the infinite
and religious systems merely take that into account
Now our finitude in the face of the infinite has some inevitable consequences
and I would say those consequences
are essentially the existential conditions of life. The first of those consequences is that
the finite is always overwhelmed by the infinite, it has to be because it can't encapsulate it and so what that means is that it's
that suffering is central to the nature of human existence
and suffering exists as a consequence of the consequences of our limitations
I mean every single person who's alive is going to die
And every single person who's alive is going to deal with serious physical illness and mental distress
If they don't suffer, if they aren't suffering it directly, immediately, right now on their own
It's almost inevitably the case that every single person who walks the Earth
is confronting the bare bones of reality at that level in the guise of an afflicted family member
And so the fact of our finitude is again, no academic issue.
It's essential to the nature of our being and we're forced to deal with it on an ongoing basis
So I would say insufficiency is built into human experience and there are existential consequences to that
Now I read something a long time ago, and I don't remember who wrote it, but it was written about
Jewish commentary on the Torah
God is omniscient
omnipotent and omnipresent
What does he lack?
And the answer is limitation
And that's a riddle and an answer of unparalleled brilliance
as far as I'm concerned, because I think it speaks
Deeply to something about the central nature of existence itself and that is that
without limitation, there's no being
Now that's a hard thing to understand
But I think you can understand it in a number of different ways
the first thing you might want to understand is that...
I play this game with my students sometimes in my class
I'll come up to a student, I pick a poor victim at random and come up to them
and say: Okay, we're going to play a game
And they say: ok. And I say: well you move first
well, they don't know what to do and the reason for that is because the limiting parameters of the game have not been defined
And, as a consequence of that, they're stunned by their infinite freedom into complete immobility
and what that means in a sense is that in the absence of serious constraint there can be no choice
no freedom, no existence. And I believe this to be
fundamentally true, just as the fact that human being is vulnerable is fundamentally true
Here's another example that I think is more personal to me
and it emerged in my imagination as a consequence of my contemplation of my son's
vulnerability. So I have children. They´re teenagers now. I still like them
One of the things I was really struck by when my children were little was how perfect
they were like and I believe that that was the
Benevolence of God in a sense -  children are tremendously difficult
they're a tremendous responsibility - but they're so perfect and they manifest that perfection in such a
remarkable way that that's the payment for taking on the responsibility of bringing them into being and caring for them and
The thing about being a parent is that the vulnerability of people
may manifest to you in a way that was never the case prior to that and
It's not it's haunting and it's beautiful, but it's also exactly right in a way, and I was thinking well look at my son
He's a little kid
You know you got to chase after him all the time you can get sick people hurt him
you know, people are going to be mean to him. He's going to be disappointed in his life
He's vulnerable, and it's a constant tragic reality that he's vulnerable. And I thought well, okay
Let's say we want to do something about that, so let's say we make him so that no one can pick on him
so it could inflate him to about 20 feet high and equip him with a
metallic
skeleton and a cast-iron exoskeleton, and you could equip him with a
computerized intelligence that far supersedes his own, and you could remove his vulnerabilities one by one hypothetically
and of course more and more
We're in a position where we could do that in reality. And one of the things I realized right away was that
as you remove the vulnerabilities you remove the thing you love
And then I started to understand more deeply that vulnerability was a precondition for human being and that was a desirable
precondition because the things about human existence that are wonderful and
remarkable are so integrally tied up with
vulnerability that they're actually inextricable
The Jewish commentary
what the
Infinite lacks is the finite
There's a more abstract way of getting at the same thing
If you could do absolutely anything you wanted at any point
and be anywhere you wanted, be anything you wanted and if there was nothing that was out of your reach
there would be nothing to do because you'd be everything at once and when you're everything at once,
which is at least in principle the position of God,
There's no story and there's no being and there's something about being that is a story. And without limitation
there's no story. So then the question starts to become, with regards to consideration of human vulnerability. Is there a way to conduct your life
In such a manner that the intrinsic vulnerability that characterizes your life
is rendered, not only acceptable but desirable. And to me that's the central question of existence. And I tell you, get that wrong
and you're on the wrong track and if you're on the wrong track, man, you are in one terrible place
I would say, with regards to tragedy, humans are vulnerable and that's tragic
But if tragedy is the price that we pay for existence then so be it if existence is justifiable
And so tragedy itself, which is merely a revelation of our vulnerability, can't be regarded as evil
it's just a... it's a condition of existence
And so it's necessary to distinguish the tragic conditions of existence from evil before you can even address the problem
And I think what that means to some degree is you should not blame on the
relationship between the finite and the infinite
the terrible failings of humanity that can be laid directly at the feet of human beings
So earthquakes aren't evil and cancer isn't evil and
Mental illness isn't evil and predators aren't evil. They just are part of the way things are
But there are certain categories of human action that are
definitely outside the parameters of mere tragedy. And those are the things we really have to get a handle on
Evil for me is differentiated from tragedy by its lack of necessity and it's volunteerism
and
It's a tenant, I think, of modern materialistic thought that
there are social or material causes for actions and it's an extraordinarily useful theory
And I think... but I think one of the unfortunate consequences of that
is that we've tended to write off much of human misbehavior and attribute it to, say
insufficiencies and material conditions
which is not an it's not an acceptable theory. There are all sorts of human cultures that were characterized by
virtually complete absence of material
Luxury, well-being
Whose cultures were highly functional and and highly moral
And to describe the propensity towards misbehavior as a consequence of economic inequality
Is entirely beside the point as far as I'm concerned
Evil is more pernicious than that
Which is generated for example by social inequality. I think it's actually, although
this is a terrifying thought in some ways, it's more appropriate to consider it a form of
demonically
warped
aesthetic. And I'll give you a couple of examples of what I mean by that for example
Because the manifestation of this warped aesthetic makes itself
apparent under certain conditions, so for example
I think it made itself apparent in the imagination of the first politician who coined the acronym
MAD or Mutual Assured Destruction
That's an aesthetic of Evil, to make a joke
of a situation that catastrophic
indicates the kind of malevolence that lurks behind the fact that such a condition exists
The motto on the gates of Auschwitz, I believe,
in the second world war
Work will make you free
That's another manifestation of the aesthetic of evil. It's a terrible terrible
ironic joke and
It's instructive to meditate on what sort of imagination would have the arrogance to
tell such a terrible joke
The concentration Camps are classic examples of evil
And I think by analyzing at least certain kinds of events that occurred within them
It's easier to get a clear idea of what evil constitutes. And one of the stories that's always
haunting me, I guess, is - I believe it's another story derived from Auschwitz -
The prison guards in Auschwitz would take the prisoners who were already stripped of their dignity, and to whatever degree
possible, their identity and their culture and their language and their status as valuable beings. And yet that wasn't sufficient
they needed to be tortured in addition to that before they were killed and the torture often consisted of a
self-evidently counterproductive work
A situation that also frequently characterized activity in the soviet gulag archipelago where perhaps 60 million people met their death
A typical Auschwitz example was the requirement for prisoners to carry 100-pound sacks of wet salt from one side of the compound and then back again
Now that's evil as far as I'm concerned
and you have to think about it from an aesthetic perspective in a sense because it's a celebration of horror
And it's a conscious attempt to violate the conditions that make life itself tolerable, and it's aimed at
dehumanization
destruction of the ideal
And at an even deeper level,
revenge against the conditions of existence itself
I've tried to understand the developmental pathway that leads to acts like that
My academic research as well as my clinical experience
Has revealed to me that
What appears to lie at the bottom of motivation for the excesses of behavior that characterize evil
are too tightly causally related factors
one, arrogance and another resentment
And both of those are tied up with
vulnerability of human beings in the face of the infinite but
but tied up with something more
profound as well
The most thorough account of this that I've managed, I think, at least to partially comprehend
I believe is contained in the first couple of the stories in the old testament
In Genesis
The story of Adam and Eve and the fall of man. And the immediately following story of Cain and Abel
As far as we can tell those are very very old stories. They predate judaism at least in some of their
in some of their structural elements
It's conceivable that some of the and those stories are as old as the human capacity to tell stories itself
Assuming that they were grounded in an oral tradition that predated the written tradition
and we know that oral traditions can last at least in some forms unchanged for periods of up to
25,000 years, so the anthropological and archaeological evidence is fairly clear on that point
these are very very very old stories
And people remember them and created them for reasons we really don't understand
And they're strange and mysterious and unforgettable all at the same time
The story of Adam and Eve, as far as I can tell, is the story of the coming of consciousness
The coming of self-consciousness to Mankind
And, I think that the human
The human self-consciousness is what separates us from animals
In Genesis there's an insistence that
When Adam ate the apple that eve offered to him the scales fell from his eyes and the first thing that he realized was that
He was naked
And what that seems to me to mean is that, I mean...
I think it means first of all that women make men self-conscious
And I think there's ample reason to presume not and there's good evolutionary reasons for suggesting
why that might be the case. Because sexual selection among
human beings has been a primary force of evolutionary development and sexual selection in human beings
is primarily
conducted by women. So, for example, as Roy has pointed out in
his address to the APA a few years ago,
and I hope I get this right, twice as many of your relatives where women as men. And that means that women
are more frequently reproductive successful than men and that they reject most men
And the rejection of a man for reproductive purposes by a woman is the most serious form of rejection that's possible from an evolutionary
point of view because the judgment is that
Well you might be nice enough to talk to but you're sure not fit to have your genes propagate into the next generation
So it's no wonder that women can make men self-conscious
And I think there's some reason to presume that it's the sexual selection forces that women placed upon man
That drove rapid human cortical evolution and the development of self-consciousness. Now that's a leap
And there's no way I can justify that in the course of this particular
talk but I think there is good reason to presume that it's the case
In Genesis human beings become self-conscious and the first thing that happens to them is that they realize they're naked and then the next thing
that happens to them is they develop the moral sense to tell the difference between good and evil
And it's a very strange thing because in some sense before a creature is self conscious
there is no distinction between good and evil because as I said before a predator is not evil
It's just a predator. The fact of a predator like a wolf might be a tragedy for the rabbit
But you can't be assuming that the wolf is evil merely because it wants to eat the rabbit
but with the dawning of self-consciousness there seems to be
the emergence of a moral sense that's essentially unique to human beings and that has something to do with our
capacity to reflect upon the mechanisms of our action and then, for some reason, to be able to
modify those actions and to choose which ones to implement into the future, in the future
We don't understand that and you can even deny if you'd like that the phenomena of free choice exists
But our culture is essentially
predicated on the notion that it does exist and in the absence of evidence that it doesn't I'm going to take the easy way out
and assume that it does
Otherwise things fall apart and they fall apart badly
When...
After Adam and Eve becomes self conscious the first thing they do is close themselves. And to me that's a mythological
description of the emergence of culture as an
intersession between the fundamental
vulnerability and nakedness of the human form and the depredations of nature. If you realize that you're vulnerable
and prone to death the first thing you're going to do is to start rearranging the manner in which you construe yourself
So that you can protect yourself from such an unfortunate outcome
that's, I think, partly why God curses Adam with the
necessity of work once he finds out, once God finds out that people have become self conscious. Like if you know that
that winter is lurking in the future, for example, you're going to work and animals don't work
they're just motivated to do whatever they do
But humans work and that means they subvert their day to day
motivations, their immediate motivations for the purposes of future security and there's a real cost to that
I mean, part of the cost is separation from the pure and unadulterated flow of animal life, and I believe that people suffer from that
absence of flow
continually and
the advantage they gain from it
Is that they can plan for the future, but the disadvantage is that they're calculative and cold and separated from their own instinctual resources
Eve, of course, is cursed by what's going to be terrible pain in childbirth, and that's related to the development of
the Immense skull size that characterizes human infants and their incredibly lengthy period of
dependence which is also associated with their immense brain
After Adam and eve become self-conscious they hide
And this is actually a comical part of genesis
it's never really read as a comedy, but it is a comedy even the fall itself is a comedy and...
so they're hiding away behind a bush
and God comes walking through the garden and God, the infinite, is accustomed to walking with Adam, with no
interruption of the flow of information between them
But Adam is in error and God says you know
Where where have you gone and Adam says: Oh well
I'm hiding. And God says, which is kind of stupid really and this is why it's a comics, like he's hiding behind a bush
This is God, and he can see through bushes and like Adam should know that. But It doesn't really matter
He's hiding me on this bush anyways and God... So Adam says I'm hiding and and God says: Well
well why are you hiding? Well it's because Adam is ashamed and...
Adam says: Well, I'm naked
And this is an example of the tremendous
compression of Human wisdom into a few lines that characterizes mythology. You could say: Well, why would people hide from God
once they realize they're naked? And I would say well, that's pretty obvious, like, once you know you're vulnerable.
Or do you really have enough courage to manifest any sort of semblance of a divine destiny?
Well, the answer to that is pretty much, clearly no
And it's no bloody wonder. And so the hiding is... People hide when they're self-conscious and vulnerable. And what are they hiding from then?
They're hiding from their deepest destiny and it's no wonder. God says: Okay, yeah, well you figured that out
and how that happened. And Adam says, and this is comical too, It was the woman's fault. Which I think is really funny and
which actually may have been the original sin and not the eating of the apple, right? The first time that
the man blamed the woman for his self-conscious misery
I think that's the real fall and not the rise of self-consciousness itself
Anyways, we know the rest of the story. God says: Oh, well the cats out of the bag now.
You know you're vulnerable and from here on in history starts. Your out of paradise, you're out of unconscious
identification with the natural world. You're going to work, you're going to sweat lots of the time it isn't going to work and
Women, they're going to be beholden to their husbands not because that's divine
fiat, but because the developmental...
The developmental dependency of a human infant is so extreme that women are cursed to rely on men for protection
when they're at their most vulnerable
Fine. So that's self-consciousness and an explanation for why people would hide away from their destiny
But then the next story, the Cain and Abel story really
elaborates that out and describes it. And so Cain and Abel, of course, are two sons of Adam and Eve
And they're really the first people
Because, of course Adam and Eve were made by God
so they're really not people at all because people are born. And Cain and Abel are the first two people
And they characterized, as far as I can tell,
to canonical patterns of reaction, to the terrible vulnerability that's revealed as a consequence of the development of self-consciousness
Cain and Abel make sacrifices to God
Why?
Human cultures make sacrifices. That's what they do, sacrifice, sacrificial rituals is human universal
blood sacrifices is human universal
human sacrifice, at least in some
anthropological epochs was regarded as a human universal. Why do people make sacrifices to God to please them?
It seems like a mystery to modern people
I ask my students. What sacrifices did you make to go to university?
Well, they can answer that in
2/10 of a second. You know they can't party as much as they might have they can't drink nearly as much beer as they might
have liked to. More seriously, a lot of them work, a lot of them have put their families in
serious financial straits to send them to university. They've given up all sorts of things
In order to pursue a course of action that they believe will best ensure their harmonious relationship with the nature of reality?
Everyone makes sacrifices. Ok, we can say that now because we're psychologically sophisticated and linguistically sophisticated
We know something about human psychology
But thousands and thousands of years ago, before people had this explicit psychological acumen, the best
they could do is act out and tell stories about human psychology because they hadn't developed any further than that
And Cain and Abel is one of those stories
The Sacrifices are burnt on an altar
Why? Well a smoke rises. Well,
so what? Well God's up in the sky and if the smoke rises up there, and he gets a whiff of it
He can tell what the quality of the sacrifice was and you can laugh about that
And you can think it. You can think about it as primitive
But it's not primitive, its artistic and it's beautiful in it
And it's accurate. And here's why, is because
before the invention of the electrical light and maybe before the invention of fire and...
The closest a human being could ever get to direct confrontation with the absolute unknown was to look up at the night sky
Because the night sky, especially when it's sprinkled with stars
confronts you directly with the fact of the infinite. And to make the presupposition
that God resides in the infinite, and you're having a direct experience
of the infinite at that moment, is not a primitive notion it's a very
intelligent and and creative hypothesis
And so, the notion that god occupies the sky, the day sky being equally as impressive as the night sky, is not a primitive
hypothesis, it's a reflection of the nature of a certain kind of human experience. You burn something and you send the smoke up
God gets a crack at determining the quality
of your offering, the quality of your sacrifice
Well, let's be perfectly clear about this
If your sacrifices aren't first-rate the nature of your relationship with the infinite is going to suffer dreadfully
And that's exactly what the story of Cain and Abel reveals.
Now, Abel
He's a trusting character. He believes in the nature of experience, in the nature of existence. When he's called on to make a sacrifice
he sacrifices the best that he has to offer and that makes God happy and as a consequence everything that abel touches turns to gold
Everyone likes him, they respect him. His crops multiply, he's successful with women
Plus he's a wonderful guy, so you could hardly imagine a more annoying creature if you possibly attempted to do it
Whereas Cain has reacted to his self-consciousness by withdrawing from the infinite
And there's a tremendous danger in that because it starts to mean that he relies purely on his own
devious devices to
Sale his ship through the shores of life
He believes, as his arrogance develops, as a consequence of this withdrawal from the infinite
A contact that he can't tolerate because he can't tolerate his own vulnerability, that he is able to deceive the structure of reality itself to offer
second-rate sacrifices to God himself, who can see
absolutely everything because the infinite is absolutely everything and to prevail nonetheless
Well, needless to say this does not work
And it doesn't work in an obvious way if you talk to people and they reveal to you their
unnecessary suffering it's very straightforward to look behind what it is that they have to say
They'll tell you the poor decisions they made
in their lives and the opportunities that they didn't take and the chances that they didn't
they didn't have enough courage to grasp and the sacrifices they fail to make. There's nothing mysterious about it
And their own experiences teach them full well that they pathologized the relationship they have with the nature of reality
Well, that's a terrible thing. Well, and Cain is dreadfully unhappy
He's unhappy because nothing he ever wants happens
And that's partly because he doesn't really want it because if he really wanted he'd make the right sacrifices
And the salt is rubbed into his wounds by the existence of his brother, for whom everything seems simple
But of course really isn't. Cain goes to complain to God
And I had to read three or four different translations of these particular verses to figure out what this meant
And he says
What in the world is going on here? I'm working myself to the bone
I'm sacrificing things left right and center. Everything
I touch turns to dirt, everything turns against me. Like, what's up with the nature of reality?
Cain's essential vulnerability is revealed
And exacerbated by his pathological attitude towards his own actions. God says to him, essentially
Sin is a predatory cat that
crouches at your doorway and leaps on you at will
But if you only wanted to, you could master it.
And that is absolutely
the last thing that Cain wants to hear because if things are going from bad to worse for you
and you're playing a causal role in it
There's nothing more horrible that someone can do you
But reveal to you in a way that you can't deny, that you're entirely complicit in your own demise
And that's exactly what God does to Cain. And so, what does Cain do?
Well the logical thing would be listen because if the structure of reality itself tells you something
It's best to listen since there's no way out of it. But that's not what Cain does. He's so incensed by his essential vulnerability,
compromised and exacerbated by his failure to make the appropriate sacrifices and to conduct himself appropriately
that he decides, then and there, number one, to destroy his ideal, to reduce the tension that he feels
when that ideal exists as a contrast point and number two, to destroy the favorite son of God. And so he goes out into the field
and kills Abel. And God comes along and says: Where's my favorite son? And Cain says:
I killed him
And it's so interesting to me that that story is placed... Really, it's the third story in the old testament
It's it's with the archaic stories
And it's a story that reveals, as far as I can tell, that there are two essential patterns of reaction to the
self-conscious vulnerable conditions of existence. And one is
humble
approach to infinity with determined attempts to make the appropriate sacrifices
The other is arrogance, resentment, the keeping of everything good for oneself
and the degeneration of the soul into something that's homicidally murderous
Well the story doesn't stop there. It gets really compressed in this part
And that's perhaps because some of its being lost with the passages of time. But the next thing that happens is that
Well, God doesn't punish Cain
And you think
That's kind of strange. I mean, in the whole old testament, God, he's punishing people left right and center
Why not Cain? And you think, well
He marks Cain, and he says to the people who are around that they should leave him alone
Because he's been marked by God as to be left alone. And the reason for that I think
And this is something that's reflected in our legal system, is that
Murder promotes revenge
And revenge destroys societies. And so God puts an end to the situation, right there and then, by telling people
that, despite the fact that Cain has
has committed a terrible crime that there will be no retribution
Cain goes off and gets married and he has a number of generations of offspring
If you insult a member of the first generation of Cain's offspring
he doesn't kill you, it kills seven of you
And if you insult a member of the second generation of Cain's offspring
he doesn't kill seven of you, he kills seven times seven of you
And then on down the road of the offspring of Cain is Tubal Cain
And Tubal Cain is the
artificer of weapons of War and
this
Stunningly Brilliant story says in it's incredibly compressed fashion that the motivation that drives
the commission of the worst human atrocities is an inevitable social consequence of the refusal of the
self-conscious individual to make the sacrifices appropriate to establishing a harmonious life and
their consequent degeneration into a kind of murderous and resentment filled rage
propagating endlessly through its variations in society until everything comes to an end
And the next story is the flood
And it's not surprising
Because if things go from bad to worse long enough
everything Falls
And it's a terrifying story. I didn't understand that story. I didn't understand that story for years
It wasn't really until I read Alexandr Solzhenitsyn
that I developed, I think, the cognitive capacity then to even understand what the story meant because
Solzhenitsyn said in its Nobel prize accepting speech
A single person who stop flying can bring down a tyranny, which is a stunning thing to say
But I would also say something that's been amply demonstrated in the 20th century because we have
historical examples of people who did precisely that. Gandhi did it, Václav Havel did it, Nelson Mandela did it
Solzhenitsyn's Gulag Archipelago was definitely one of the ax blows that brought down the Soviet Union
A stunning achievement for a person who started writing that book by
memorizing it when he was a concentration camp victim, this far away from starvation
It shows you,
as clearly as anything possibly can, how powerful the human spirit can be if it's willing to take on the
obligation of its relationship with the divine. And also how terrible things can become if the responsibility of that burden is not shouldered
Now, it's no wonder as far as I can tell that people don't think this way because
Thinking this way is it's catastrophic in a way
Because the burden it places on the individual is so extreme that it's almost unbearable while in a...
But that's exactly why it is in Genesis, to begin with, that Adam hides, but he becomes conscious of his own vulnerability
It's like, he thinks well a creature such as I, I could never bear such a burden well
there's a lot more to people than meets the eye
And the only way I learned that was by looking at people's and my own. People's and my own
capacity for Evil, because I started to realize that
we regard ourselves as narrow little beings in a particular kind of box and there's real comfort in that although there's tremendous limitation
You cannot see your way out of that box until you know. Well what I teach my students
I teach them about Nazi Germany
and I try to make them understand that there's an overwhelming probability if they were in Nazi Germany in the
1930s that they would have been perpetrators and nazis. An overwhelming probability
And if they can't accept that, because it's a historical fact, they have absolutely no idea who they are
Now, imagining yourself as a nazi perpetrator is an unbearably terrifying thing to do
But I don't believe that you can do...
I don't think that you have any insight whatsoever into your capacity for good
until you have some well-developed insight into your capacity for evil
Because people can tell you till they're blue in their face about your capacity for good, it just sounds like...
It sounds like wishful thinking. It sounds like the sort of thing that an advertiser might tell you on TV
It's just too good to be true
And I don't think people believe it
But I think that if you tell people that, you know, in the cold dark corners of their mind there are
motivations that are so terrible that they would, they would traumatize
themselves if they were ever revealed, that everyone knows at some level of analysis that that's absolutely true
You think... There's evidence throughout history that it's possible for people to be
enlightened. And you'd think,
since enlightenment is viewed as the medication for vulnerability and death that everybody would be struggling
as hard as they possibly could to be enlightened, if such a state exactly and precisely
exists, but if the barrier to enlightenment is the development of self consciousness of the individual
human's infinite capacity for evil then you can be
immediately
convinced about why
Enlightenment is in such short supply
When I
finished my first provisional examination of the sorts of motivations that drove people to set up concentration camps
and to torture people terribly in those camps, I came to a terrible conclusion
It was a conclusion that
I think in some ways was the worst thing that had ever happened to me, maybe intellectually and morally, I thought
I came to understand
why it is that people depended on their group identity in their cultural identification,
because that helped protect themselves from their own vulnerability
You have to believe things because you just don't know everything so you have to believe things they fill in the gaps
the beliefs fill in the gaps
If the beliefs are stripped from you then your
defenses against the infinite are stripped. And it's no wonder that people will defend their beliefs
I thought, well you do if you're too involved in defending your beliefs, you're going to be willing to kill other people in their defence
And we're so technologically powerful now that we can no longer be willing to kill other people in the defense of our own beliefs because
the time for that is passed
And I realized well with you if you don't stand up for your beliefs you leave yourself bereft
You're open to the depredations of the infinite. That's equally
intolerable, it seems to leave no way out
There is a way out, you know, and I think it's the way out that
genuinely religious people have tried to offer humanity for thousands and thousands of years. And the way out of the conundrum
posed to you by your reliance on ideological beliefs and your vulnerability in the face of the unknown, is the development of
a truly integrated and powerful character. And that's a
individual development and it means
constant confrontation with things you don't understand and constant attempts to ensure that your character is composed of truth and
solidity Rather than deceit
And to make of yourself something that's built on a rock and not predicated on sand. And the thing is, it's one thing to tell people that
because maybe they should take care of themselves
But I don't know if that's enough to tell people because they don't take care of themselves that well
But it's a completely other thing to say look, you know, every time you make a pathological moral decision
you move the one the world one step closer to complete annihilation
And I absolutely believe that. I think the historical evidence is crystal clear
And I also think that every time you make an appropriate moral decision, and you manifest moral courage in the face of your own vulnerability
then you move the world one step farther from the break
And every...  that's the case for every single person. You know, Solzhenitsyn said, drawing on his eastern orthodox christian background:
Every single person is the center of the world
As center of the world, not 'the' center of the world. The world is a complicated place. It can have all sorts of centers
It's hard to believe that you might be one of them, but
everything about human existence is hard to believe
The fact that it's here at all is hard to believe, the nature of it's hard to believe
Everything that human beings does is so
ridiculous and remarkable that it's like it's a consistently and constantly unfolding miracle. The idea that each of you might be
a center of the cosmos, in that
infinite admixture of ridiculousness and absurdities, is hardly more than one more ridiculous thing to swallow
Well I'll summarize, I guess
I said that tragedy is a precondition for being
Being is the interplay between the finite and the infinite. And in that interplay there's tragedy. And there's no way out of that
Evil is something different
Evil is the conscious attempt to make the conditions of existence more pathological than they have to be. And it's motivated by conscious intent
The motivations arise because people pay a terrible price for their self conscious awareness
And that awareness is their awareness of their vulnerability. And that is a terrible thing to be aware of
That vulnerability can be confronted forthrightly, accepted, and the appropriate decisions made. Alternatively people can retreat into their own
rationalistic arrogance and attempt to deceive themselves and everyone else about the nature of their own existence and about the nature of reality
That Pathway leads to nothing but destruction
I think that there's good reason to assume that it's too late in the...
in our developmental course as a species for that path to be acceptable anymore
because we're too powerful, and if too many people stay on that path, we're going to do ourselves in
So I would say as we've become more technologically powerful, an increasing moral burden is being placed on each of us
It matters, to the destiny of the cosmos, whether or not you get your moral act straight
And I don't mean that in a trivial way
I believe that that's as close to an empirical fact as anything that can be demonstrated
And I also believe that's as terrifying a thing to consider as anything you could possibly imagine. And maybe it's too much to ask of people
But you know our great religious traditions do
continually remind us that inside every human being there's a spark of divinity. And that idea is a precondition
for our entire system of law
There's always the possibility that it's true
And if it's true it means that there is an infinite avenue of
potential that lays open to every single person. And that the ability
to transform the terrible conditions of reality into something, not only acceptable
but worthy of celebration, actually lies within our grasp
An alternative to that, the alternative to that is the continual generation of a kind of hell. That's so
incomprehensibly awful that,
by any reasonable person standards,
it has to be regarded as something to avoid
That's all I have to say about that.